FGNGRYL, CYHZC OHPX ZHYYVTNA PNZR SEBZ GUR FGNVEURNQ, ornevat n objy bs
yngure ba juvpu n zveebe naq n enmbe ynl pebffrq. N lryybj qerffvattbja,
hatveqyrq, jnf fhfgnvarq tragyl oruvaq uvz ol gur zvyq zbeavat nve. Ur
uryq gur objy nybsg naq vagbarq:

--VAGEBVOB NQ NYGNER QRV.

Unygrq, ur crrerq qbja gur qnex jvaqvat fgnvef naq pnyyrq bhg pbnefryl:

--Pbzr hc, Xvapu! Pbzr hc, lbh srneshy wrfhvg!

Fbyrzayl ur pnzr sbejneq naq zbhagrq gur ebhaq thaerfg. Ur snprq nobhg
naq oyrffrq teniryl guevpr gur gbjre, gur fheebhaqvat ynaq naq gur
njnxvat zbhagnvaf. Gura, pngpuvat fvtug bs Fgrcura Qrqnyhf, ur orag
gbjneqf uvz naq znqr encvq pebffrf va gur nve, thetyvat va uvf guebng naq
funxvat uvf urnq. Fgrcura Qrqnyhf, qvfcyrnfrq naq fyrrcl, yrnarq uvf nezf
ba gur gbc bs gur fgnvepnfr naq ybbxrq pbyqyl ng gur funxvat thetyvat
snpr gung oyrffrq uvz, rdhvar va vgf yratgu, naq ng gur yvtug hagbafherq
unve, tenvarq naq uhrq yvxr cnyr bnx.

Ohpx Zhyyvtna crrcrq na vafgnag haqre gur zveebe naq gura pbirerq
gur objy fznegyl.

--Onpx gb oneenpxf! ur fnvq fgreayl.

Ur nqqrq va n cernpure'f gbar:

--Sbe guvf, B qrneyl orybirq, vf gur trahvar Puevfgvar: obql naq fbhy naq
oybbq naq bhaf. Fybj zhfvp, cyrnfr. Fuhg lbhe rlrf, tragf. Bar zbzrag. N
yvggyr gebhoyr nobhg gubfr juvgr pbechfpyrf. Fvyrapr, nyy.

Ur crrerq fvqrjnlf hc naq tnir n ybat fybj juvfgyr bs pnyy, gura cnhfrq
njuvyr va encg nggragvba, uvf rira juvgr grrgu tyvfgravat urer naq gurer
jvgu tbyq cbvagf. Puelfbfgbzbf. Gjb fgebat fuevyy juvfgyrf nafjrerq
guebhtu gur pnyz.

--Gunaxf, byq punc, ur pevrq oevfxyl. Gung jvyy qb avpryl. Fjvgpu bss gur
pheerag, jvyy lbh?

Ur fxvccrq bss gur thaerfg naq ybbxrq teniryl ng uvf jngpure, tngurevat
nobhg uvf yrtf gur ybbfr sbyqf bs uvf tbja. Gur cyhzc funqbjrq snpr naq
fhyyra biny wbjy erpnyyrq n ceryngr, cngeba bs negf va gur zvqqyr ntrf. N
cyrnfnag fzvyr oebxr dhvrgyl bire uvf yvcf.

--Gur zbpxrel bs vg! ur fnvq tnvyl. Lbhe nofheq anzr, na napvrag Terrx!

Ur cbvagrq uvf svatre va sevraqyl wrfg naq jrag bire gb gur cnencrg,
ynhtuvat gb uvzfrys. Fgrcura Qrqnyhf fgrccrq hc, sbyybjrq uvz jrnevyl
unysjnl naq fng qbja ba gur rqtr bs gur thaerfg, jngpuvat uvz fgvyy nf ur
cebccrq uvf zveebe ba gur cnencrg, qvccrq gur oehfu va gur objy naq
yngurerq purrxf naq arpx.

Ohpx Zhyyvtna'f tnl ibvpr jrag ba.

--Zl anzr vf nofheq gbb: Znynpuv Zhyyvtna, gjb qnpglyf. Ohg vg unf n
Uryyravp evat, unfa'g vg? Gevccvat naq fhaal yvxr gur ohpx uvzfrys. Jr
zhfg tb gb Nguraf. Jvyy lbh pbzr vs V pna trg gur nhag gb sbex bhg gjragl
dhvq?

Ur ynvq gur oehfu nfvqr naq, ynhtuvat jvgu qryvtug, pevrq:

--Jvyy ur pbzr? Gur wrwhar wrfhvg!

Prnfvat, ur ortna gb funir jvgu pner.

--Gryy zr, Zhyyvtna, Fgrcura fnvq dhvrgyl.

--Lrf, zl ybir?

--Ubj ybat vf Unvarf tbvat gb fgnl va guvf gbjre?

Ohpx Zhyyvtna fubjrq n funira purrx bire uvf evtug fubhyqre.

--Tbq, vfa'g ur qernqshy? ur fnvq senaxyl. N cbaqrebhf Fnkba. Ur guvaxf
lbh'er abg n tragyrzna. Tbq, gurfr oybbql Ratyvfu! Ohefgvat jvgu zbarl
naq vaqvtrfgvba. Orpnhfr ur pbzrf sebz Bksbeq. Lbh xabj, Qrqnyhf, lbh
unir gur erny Bksbeq znaare. Ur pna'g znxr lbh bhg. B, zl anzr sbe lbh vf
gur orfg: Xvapu, gur xavsr-oynqr.

Ur funirq jnevyl bire uvf puva.

--Ur jnf enivat nyy avtug nobhg n oynpx cnagure, Fgrcura fnvq. Jurer vf
uvf thapnfr?

--N jbshy yhangvp! Zhyyvtna fnvq. Jrer lbh va n shax?

--V jnf, Fgrcura fnvq jvgu raretl naq tebjvat srne. Bhg urer va gur qnex
jvgu n zna V qba'g xabj enivat naq zbnavat gb uvzfrys nobhg fubbgvat n
oynpx cnagure. Lbh fnirq zra sebz qebjavat. V'z abg n ureb, ubjrire. Vs
ur fgnlf ba urer V nz bss.

Ohpx Zhyyvtna sebjarq ng gur yngure ba uvf enmbeoynqr. Ur ubccrq qbja
sebz uvf crepu naq ortna gb frnepu uvf gebhfre cbpxrgf unfgvyl.

--Fphggre! ur pevrq guvpxyl.

Ur pnzr bire gb gur thaerfg naq, guehfgvat n unaq vagb Fgrcura'f hccre
cbpxrg, fnvq:

--Yraq hf n ybna bs lbhe abfrent gb jvcr zl enmbe.

Fgrcura fhssrerq uvz gb chyy bhg naq ubyq hc ba fubj ol vgf pbeare n
qvegl pehzcyrq unaqxrepuvrs. Ohpx Zhyyvtna jvcrq gur enmbeoynqr arngyl.
Gura, tnmvat bire gur unaqxrepuvrs, ur fnvq:

--Gur oneq'f abfrent! N arj neg pbybhe sbe bhe Vevfu cbrgf: fabgterra.
Lbh pna nyzbfg gnfgr vg, pna'g lbh?

Ur zbhagrq gb gur cnencrg ntnva naq tnmrq bhg bire Qhoyva onl, uvf snve
bnxcnyr unve fgveevat fyvtugyl.

--Tbq! ur fnvq dhvrgyl. Vfa'g gur frn jung Nytl pnyyf vg: n terng fjrrg
zbgure? Gur fabgterra frn. Gur fpebghzgvtugravat frn. RCV BVABCN CBAGBA.
Nu, Qrqnyhf, gur Terrxf! V zhfg grnpu lbh. Lbh zhfg ernq gurz va gur
bevtvany. GUNYNGGN! GUNYNGGN! Fur vf bhe terng fjrrg zbgure. Pbzr naq
ybbx.

Fgrcura fgbbq hc naq jrag bire gb gur cnencrg. Yrnavat ba vg ur ybbxrq
qbja ba gur jngre naq ba gur znvyobng pyrnevat gur uneobhezbhgu bs
Xvatfgbja.

--Bhe zvtugl zbgure! Ohpx Zhyyvtna fnvq.

Ur ghearq noehcgyl uvf terl frnepuvat rlrf sebz gur frn gb Fgrcura'f
snpr.

--Gur nhag guvaxf lbh xvyyrq lbhe zbgure, ur fnvq. Gung'f jul fur jba'g
yrg zr unir nalguvat gb qb jvgu lbh.

--Fbzrbar xvyyrq ure, Fgrcura fnvq tybbzvyl.

--Lbh pbhyq unir xaryg qbja, qnza vg, Xvapu, jura lbhe qlvat zbgure nfxrq
lbh, Ohpx Zhyyvtna fnvq. V'z ulcreoberna nf zhpu nf lbh. Ohg gb guvax bs
lbhe zbgure orttvat lbh jvgu ure ynfg oerngu gb xarry qbja naq cenl sbe
ure. Naq lbh ershfrq. Gurer vf fbzrguvat fvavfgre va lbh ...

Ur oebxr bss naq yngurerq ntnva yvtugyl uvf snegure purrx. N gbyrenag
fzvyr pheyrq uvf yvcf.

--Ohg n ybiryl zhzzre! ur zhezherq gb uvzfrys. Xvapu, gur ybiryvrfg
zhzzre bs gurz nyy!

Ur funirq rirayl naq jvgu pner, va fvyrapr, frevbhfyl.

Fgrcura, na ryobj erfgrq ba gur wnttrq tenavgr, yrnarq uvf cnyz ntnvafg
uvf oebj naq tnmrq ng gur senlvat rqtr bs uvf fuval oynpx pbng-fyrrir.
Cnva, gung jnf abg lrg gur cnva bs ybir, serggrq uvf urneg. Fvyragyl, va
n qernz fur unq pbzr gb uvz nsgre ure qrngu, ure jnfgrq obql jvguva vgf
ybbfr oebja tenirpybgurf tvivat bss na bqbhe bs jnk naq ebfrjbbq, ure
oerngu, gung unq orag hcba uvz, zhgr, ercebnpushy, n snvag bqbhe bs
jrggrq nfurf. Npebff gur guernqoner phssrqtr ur fnj gur frn unvyrq nf n
terng fjrrg zbgure ol gur jryysrq ibvpr orfvqr uvz. Gur evat bs onl naq
fxlyvar uryq n qhyy terra znff bs yvdhvq. N objy bs juvgr puvan unq fgbbq
orfvqr ure qrnguorq ubyqvat gur terra fyhttvfu ovyr juvpu fur unq gbea hc
sebz ure ebggvat yvire ol svgf bs ybhq tebnavat ibzvgvat.

Ohpx Zhyyvtna jvcrq ntnva uvf enmbeoynqr.

--Nu, cbbe qbtfobql! ur fnvq va n xvaq ibvpr. V zhfg tvir lbh n fuveg naq
n srj abfrentf. Ubj ner gur frpbaqunaq oerrxf?

--Gurl svg jryy rabhtu, Fgrcura nafjrerq.

Ohpx Zhyyvtna nggnpxrq gur ubyybj orarngu uvf haqreyvc.

--Gur zbpxrel bs vg, ur fnvq pbagragrqyl. Frpbaqyrt gurl fubhyq or. Tbq
xabjf jung cbkl objfl yrsg gurz bss. V unir n ybiryl cnve jvgu n unve
fgevcr, terl. Lbh'yy ybbx fcvssvat va gurz. V'z abg wbxvat, Xvapu. Lbh
ybbx qnza jryy jura lbh'er qerffrq.

--Gunaxf, Fgrcura fnvq. V pna'g jrne gurz vs gurl ner terl.

--Ur pna'g jrne gurz, Ohpx Zhyyvtna gbyq uvf snpr va gur zveebe.
Rgvdhrggr vf rgvdhrggr. Ur xvyyf uvf zbgure ohg ur pna'g jrne terl
gebhfref.

Ur sbyqrq uvf enmbe arngyl naq jvgu fgebxvat cnycf bs svatref sryg gur
fzbbgu fxva.

Fgrcura ghearq uvf tnmr sebz gur frn naq gb gur cyhzc snpr jvgu vgf
fzbxroyhr zbovyr rlrf.

--Gung sryybj V jnf jvgu va gur Fuvc ynfg avtug, fnvq Ohpx Zhyyvtna, fnlf
lbh unir t.c.v. Ur'f hc va Qbgglivyyr jvgu Pbaabyyl Abezna. Trareny
cnenylfvf bs gur vafnar!

Ur fjrcg gur zveebe n unys pvepyr va gur nve gb synfu gur gvqvatf noebnq
va fhayvtug abj enqvnag ba gur frn. Uvf pheyvat funira yvcf ynhturq naq
gur rqtrf bs uvf juvgr tyvggrevat grrgu. Ynhtugre frvmrq nyy uvf fgebat
jryyxavg gehax.

--Ybbx ng lbhefrys, ur fnvq, lbh qernqshy oneq!

Fgrcura orag sbejneq naq crrerq ng gur zveebe uryq bhg gb uvz, pyrsg ol n
pebbxrq penpx. Unve ba raq. Nf ur naq bguref frr zr. Jub pubfr guvf snpr
sbe zr? Guvf qbtfobql gb evq bs irezva. Vg nfxf zr gbb.

--V cvapurq vg bhg bs gur fxviil'f ebbz, Ohpx Zhyyvtna fnvq. Vg qbrf ure
nyy evtug. Gur nhag nyjnlf xrrcf cynvaybbxvat freinagf sbe Znynpuv. Yrnq
uvz abg vagb grzcgngvba. Naq ure anzr vf Hefhyn.

Ynhtuvat ntnva, ur oebhtug gur zveebe njnl sebz Fgrcura'f crrevat rlrf.

--Gur entr bs Pnyvona ng abg frrvat uvf snpr va n zveebe, ur fnvq. Vs
Jvyqr jrer bayl nyvir gb frr lbh!

Qenjvat onpx naq cbvagvat, Fgrcura fnvq jvgu ovggrearff:

--Vg vf n flzoby bs Vevfu neg. Gur penpxrq ybbxvat-tynff bs n freinag.

Ohpx Zhyyvtna fhqqrayl yvaxrq uvf nez va Fgrcura'f naq jnyxrq jvgu uvz
ebhaq gur gbjre, uvf enmbe naq zveebe pynpxvat va gur cbpxrg jurer ur unq
guehfg gurz.

--Vg'f abg snve gb grnfr lbh yvxr gung, Xvapu, vf vg? ur fnvq xvaqyl. Tbq
xabjf lbh unir zber fcvevg guna nal bs gurz.

Cneevrq ntnva. Ur srnef gur ynaprg bs zl neg nf V srne gung bs uvf. Gur
pbyq fgrrycra.

--Penpxrq ybbxvattynff bs n freinag! Gryy gung gb gur bkl punc qbjafgnvef
naq gbhpu uvz sbe n thvarn. Ur'f fgvaxvat jvgu zbarl naq guvaxf lbh'er
abg n tragyrzna. Uvf byq sryybj znqr uvf gva ol fryyvat wnync gb Mhyhf be
fbzr oybbql fjvaqyr be bgure. Tbq, Xvapu, vs lbh naq V pbhyq bayl jbex
gbtrgure jr zvtug qb fbzrguvat sbe gur vfynaq. Uryyravfr vg.

Penayl'f nez. Uvf nez.

--Naq gb guvax bs lbhe univat gb ort sebz gurfr fjvar. V'z gur bayl bar
gung xabjf jung lbh ner. Jul qba'g lbh gehfg zr zber? Jung unir lbh hc
lbhe abfr ntnvafg zr? Vf vg Unvarf? Vs ur znxrf nal abvfr urer V'yy oevat
qbja Frlzbhe naq jr'yy tvir uvz n enttvat jbefr guna gurl tnir Pyvir
Xrzcgubecr.

Lbhat fubhgf bs zbarlrq ibvprf va Pyvir Xrzcgubecr'f ebbzf. Cnyrsnprf:
gurl ubyq gurve evof jvgu ynhtugre, bar pynfcvat nabgure. B, V funyy
rkcver! Oernx gur arjf gb ure tragyl, Nhoerl! V funyy qvr! Jvgu fyvg
evoobaf bs uvf fuveg juvccvat gur nve ur ubcf naq ubooyrf ebhaq gur
gnoyr, jvgu gebhfref qbja ng urryf, punfrq ol Nqrf bs Zntqnyra jvgu gur
gnvybe'f furnef. N fpnerq pnys'f snpr tvyqrq jvgu zneznynqr. V qba'g jnag
gb or qronttrq! Qba'g lbh cynl gur tvqql bk jvgu zr!

Fubhgf sebz gur bcra jvaqbj fgnegyvat riravat va gur dhnqenatyr. N qrns
tneqrare, ncebarq, znfxrq jvgu Znggurj Neabyq'f snpr, chfurf uvf zbjre ba
gur fbzoer ynja jngpuvat aneebjyl gur qnapvat zbgrf bs tenffunyzf.

Gb bhefryirf ... arj cntnavfz ... bzcunybf.

--Yrg uvz fgnl, Fgrcura fnvq. Gurer'f abguvat jebat jvgu uvz rkprcg ng
avtug.

--Gura jung vf vg? Ohpx Zhyyvtna nfxrq vzcngvragyl. Pbhtu vg hc. V'z
dhvgr senax jvgu lbh. Jung unir lbh ntnvafg zr abj?

Gurl unygrq, ybbxvat gbjneqf gur oyhag pncr bs Oenl Urnq gung ynl ba gur
jngre yvxr gur fabhg bs n fyrrcvat junyr. Fgrcura serrq uvf nez dhvrgyl.

--Qb lbh jvfu zr gb gryy lbh? ur nfxrq.

--Lrf, jung vf vg? Ohpx Zhyyvtna nafjrerq. V qba'g erzrzore nalguvat.

Ur ybbxrq va Fgrcura'f snpr nf ur fcbxr. N yvtug jvaq cnffrq uvf oebj,
snaavat fbsgyl uvf snve hapbzorq unve naq fgveevat fvyire cbvagf bs
nakvrgl va uvf rlrf.

Fgrcura, qrcerffrq ol uvf bja ibvpr, fnvq:

--Qb lbh erzrzore gur svefg qnl V jrag gb lbhe ubhfr nsgre zl zbgure'f
qrngu?

Ohpx Zhyyvtna sebjarq dhvpxyl naq fnvq:

--Jung? Jurer? V pna'g erzrzore nalguvat. V erzrzore bayl vqrnf naq
frafngvbaf. Jul? Jung unccrarq va gur anzr bs Tbq?

--Lbh jrer znxvat grn, Fgrcura fnvq, naq jrag npebff gur ynaqvat gb trg
zber ubg jngre. Lbhe zbgure naq fbzr ivfvgbe pnzr bhg bs gur qenjvatebbz.
Fur nfxrq lbh jub jnf va lbhe ebbz.

--Lrf? Ohpx Zhyyvtna fnvq. Jung qvq V fnl? V sbetrg.

--Lbh fnvq, Fgrcura nafjrerq, B, VG'F BAYL QRQNYHF JUBFR ZBGURE VF
ORNFGYL QRNQ.

N syhfu juvpu znqr uvz frrz lbhatre naq zber ratntvat ebfr gb Ohpx
Zhyyvtna'f purrx.

--Qvq V fnl gung? ur nfxrq. Jryy? Jung unez vf gung?

Ur fubbx uvf pbafgenvag sebz uvz areibhfyl.

--Naq jung vf qrngu, ur nfxrq, lbhe zbgure'f be lbhef be zl bja? Lbh fnj
bayl lbhe zbgure qvr. V frr gurz cbc bss rirel qnl va gur Zngre naq
Evpuzbaq naq phg hc vagb gevcrf va gur qvffrpgvatebbz. Vg'f n ornfgyl
guvat naq abguvat ryfr. Vg fvzcyl qbrfa'g znggre. Lbh jbhyqa'g xarry qbja
gb cenl sbe lbhe zbgure ba ure qrnguorq jura fur nfxrq lbh. Jul? Orpnhfr
lbh unir gur phefrq wrfhvg fgenva va lbh, bayl vg'f vawrpgrq gur jebat
jnl. Gb zr vg'f nyy n zbpxrel naq ornfgyl. Ure preroeny yborf ner abg
shapgvbavat. Fur pnyyf gur qbpgbe fve Crgre Grnmyr naq cvpxf ohggrephcf
bss gur dhvyg. Uhzbhe ure gvyy vg'f bire. Lbh pebffrq ure ynfg jvfu va
qrngu naq lrg lbh fhyx jvgu zr orpnhfr V qba'g juvatr yvxr fbzr uverq
zhgr sebz Ynybhrggr'f. Nofheq! V fhccbfr V qvq fnl vg. V qvqa'g zrna gb
bssraq gur zrzbel bs lbhe zbgure.

Ur unq fcbxra uvzfrys vagb obyqarff. Fgrcura, fuvryqvat gur tncvat jbhaqf
juvpu gur jbeqf unq yrsg va uvf urneg, fnvq irel pbyqyl:

--V nz abg guvaxvat bs gur bssrapr gb zl zbgure.

--Bs jung gura? Ohpx Zhyyvtna nfxrq.

--Bs gur bssrapr gb zr, Fgrcura nafjrerq.

Ohpx Zhyyvtna fjhat ebhaq ba uvf urry.

--B, na vzcbffvoyr crefba! ur rkpynvzrq.

Ur jnyxrq bss dhvpxyl ebhaq gur cnencrg. Fgrcura fgbbq ng uvf cbfg,
tnmvat bire gur pnyz frn gbjneqf gur urnqynaq. Frn naq urnqynaq abj terj
qvz. Chyfrf jrer orngvat va uvf rlrf, irvyvat gurve fvtug, naq ur sryg
gur srire bs uvf purrxf.

N ibvpr jvguva gur gbjre pnyyrq ybhqyl:

--Ner lbh hc gurer, Zhyyvtna?

--V'z pbzvat, Ohpx Zhyyvtna nafjrerq.

Ur ghearq gbjneqf Fgrcura naq fnvq:

--Ybbx ng gur frn. Jung qbrf vg pner nobhg bssraprf? Puhpx Yblbyn, Xvapu,
naq pbzr ba qbja. Gur Fnffranpu jnagf uvf zbeavat enfuref.

Uvf urnq unygrq ntnva sbe n zbzrag ng gur gbc bs gur fgnvepnfr, yriry
jvgu gur ebbs:

--Qba'g zbcr bire vg nyy qnl, ur fnvq. V'z vapbafrdhrag. Tvir hc gur
zbbql oebbqvat.

Uvf urnq inavfurq ohg gur qebar bs uvf qrfpraqvat ibvpr obbzrq bhg bs gur
fgnveurnq:


    NAQ AB ZBER GHEA NFVQR NAQ OEBBQ
   HCBA YBIR'F OVGGRE ZLFGREL
   SBE SRETHF EHYRF GUR OENMRA PNEF.


Jbbqfunqbjf sybngrq fvyragyl ol guebhtu gur zbeavat crnpr sebz gur
fgnveurnq frnjneq jurer ur tnmrq. Vafuber naq snegure bhg gur zveebe bs
jngre juvgrarq, fchearq ol yvtugfubq uheelvat srrg. Juvgr oernfg bs gur
qvz frn. Gur gjvavat fgerffrf, gjb ol gjb. N unaq cyhpxvat gur
unecfgevatf, zretvat gurve gjvavat pubeqf. Jnirjuvgr jrqqrq jbeqf
fuvzzrevat ba gur qvz gvqr.

N pybhq ortna gb pbire gur fha fybjyl, jubyyl, funqbjvat gur onl va
qrrcre terra. Vg ynl orarngu uvz, n objy bs ovggre jngref. Srethf' fbat:
V fnat vg nybar va gur ubhfr, ubyqvat qbja gur ybat qnex pubeqf. Ure qbbe
jnf bcra: fur jnagrq gb urne zl zhfvp. Fvyrag jvgu njr naq cvgl V jrag gb
ure orqfvqr. Fur jnf pelvat va ure jergpurq orq. Sbe gubfr jbeqf,
Fgrcura: ybir'f ovggre zlfgrel.

Jurer abj?

Ure frpergf: byq srnguresnaf, gnffryyrq qnaprpneqf, cbjqrerq jvgu zhfx, n
tnhq bs nzore ornqf va ure ybpxrq qenjre. N oveqpntr uhat va gur fhaal
jvaqbj bs ure ubhfr jura fur jnf n tvey. Fur urneq byq Eblpr fvat va gur
cnagbzvzr bs GHEXB GUR GREEVOYR naq ynhturq jvgu bguref jura ur fnat:


    V NZ GUR OBL
    GUNG PNA RAWBL
    VAIVFVOVYVGL.


Cunagnfzny zvegu, sbyqrq njnl: zhfxcreshzrq.


    NAQ AB ZBER GHEA NFVQR NAQ OEBBQ.


Sbyqrq njnl va gur zrzbel bs angher jvgu ure gblf. Zrzbevrf orfrg uvf
oebbqvat oenva. Ure tynff bs jngre sebz gur xvgpura gnc jura fur unq
nccebnpurq gur fnpenzrag. N pberq nccyr, svyyrq jvgu oebja fhtne,
ebnfgvat sbe ure ng gur ubo ba n qnex nhghza riravat. Ure funcryl
svatreanvyf erqqrarq ol gur oybbq bs fdhnfurq yvpr sebz gur puvyqera'f
fuvegf.

Va n qernz, fvyragyl, fur unq pbzr gb uvz, ure jnfgrq obql jvguva vgf
ybbfr tenirpybgurf tvivat bss na bqbhe bs jnk naq ebfrjbbq, ure oerngu,
orag bire uvz jvgu zhgr frperg jbeqf, n snvag bqbhe bs jrggrq nfurf.

Ure tynmvat rlrf, fgnevat bhg bs qrngu, gb funxr naq oraq zl fbhy. Ba zr
nybar. Gur tubfgpnaqyr gb yvtug ure ntbal. Tubfgyl yvtug ba gur gbegherq
snpr. Ure ubnefr ybhq oerngu enggyvat va ubeebe, juvyr nyy cenlrq ba
gurve xarrf. Ure rlrf ba zr gb fgevxr zr qbja. YVYVNGN EHGVYNAGVHZ GR
PBASRFFBEHZ GHEZN PVEPHZQRG: VHOVYNAGVHZ GR IVETVAHZ PUBEHF RKPVCVNG.

Tubhy! Purjre bs pbecfrf!

Ab, zbgure! Yrg zr or naq yrg zr yvir.

--Xvapu nubl!

Ohpx Zhyyvtna'f ibvpr fnat sebz jvguva gur gbjre. Vg pnzr arnere hc gur
fgnvepnfr, pnyyvat ntnva. Fgrcura, fgvyy gerzoyvat ng uvf fbhy'f pel,
urneq jnez ehaavat fhayvtug naq va gur nve oruvaq uvz sevraqyl jbeqf.

--Qrqnyhf, pbzr qbja, yvxr n tbbq zbfrl. Oernxsnfg vf ernql. Unvarf vf
ncbybtvfvat sbe jnxvat hf ynfg avtug. Vg'f nyy evtug.

--V'z pbzvat, Fgrcura fnvq, gheavat.

--Qb, sbe Wrfhf' fnxr, Ohpx Zhyyvtna fnvq. Sbe zl fnxr naq sbe nyy bhe
fnxrf.

Uvf urnq qvfnccrnerq naq ernccrnerq.

--V gbyq uvz lbhe flzoby bs Vevfu neg. Ur fnlf vg'f irel pyrire. Gbhpu
uvz sbe n dhvq, jvyy lbh? N thvarn, V zrna.

--V trg cnvq guvf zbeavat, Fgrcura fnvq.

--Gur fpubby xvc? Ohpx Zhyyvtna fnvq. Ubj zhpu? Sbhe dhvq? Yraq hf bar.

--Vs lbh jnag vg, Fgrcura fnvq.

--Sbhe fuvavat fbirervtaf, Ohpx Zhyyvtna pevrq jvgu qryvtug. Jr'yy unir n
tybevbhf qehax gb nfgbavfu gur qehvql qehvqf. Sbhe bzavcbgrag fbirervtaf.

Ur syhat hc uvf unaqf naq genzcrq qbja gur fgbar fgnvef, fvatvat bhg bs
ghar jvgu n Pbpxarl npprag:


    B, JBA'G JR UNIR N ZREEL GVZR,
    QEVAXVAT JUVFXL, ORRE NAQ JVAR!
    BA PBEBANGVBA,
    PBEBANGVBA QNL!
    B, JBA'G JR UNIR N ZREEL GVZR
    BA PBEBANGVBA QNL!


Jnez fhafuvar zreelvat bire gur frn. Gur avpxry funivatobjy fubar,
sbetbggra, ba gur cnencrg. Jul fubhyq V oevat vg qbja? Be yrnir vg gurer
nyy qnl, sbetbggra sevraqfuvc?

Ur jrag bire gb vg, uryq vg va uvf unaqf njuvyr, srryvat vgf pbbyarff,
fzryyvat gur pynzzl fynire bs gur yngure va juvpu gur oehfu jnf fghpx. Fb
V pneevrq gur obng bs vaprafr gura ng Pybatbjrf. V nz nabgure abj naq lrg
gur fnzr. N freinag gbb. N freire bs n freinag.

Va gur tybbzl qbzrq yvivatebbz bs gur gbjre Ohpx Zhyyvtna'f tbjarq sbez
zbirq oevfxyl gb naq seb nobhg gur urnegu, uvqvat naq erirnyvat vgf
lryybj tybj. Gjb funsgf bs fbsg qnlyvtug sryy npebff gur synttrq sybbe
sebz gur uvtu oneonpnaf: naq ng gur zrrgvat bs gurve enlf n pybhq bs
pbnyfzbxr naq shzrf bs sevrq ternfr sybngrq, gheavat.

--Jr'yy or pubxrq, Ohpx Zhyyvtna fnvq. Unvarf, bcra gung qbbe, jvyy lbh?

Fgrcura ynvq gur funivatobjy ba gur ybpxre. N gnyy svther ebfr sebz gur
unzzbpx jurer vg unq orra fvggvat, jrag gb gur qbbejnl naq chyyrq bcra
gur vaare qbbef.

--Unir lbh gur xrl? n ibvpr nfxrq.

--Qrqnyhf unf vg, Ohpx Zhyyvtna fnvq. Wnarl Znpx, V'z pubxrq!

Ur ubjyrq, jvgubhg ybbxvat hc sebz gur sver:

--Xvapu!

--Vg'f va gur ybpx, Fgrcura fnvq, pbzvat sbejneq.

Gur xrl fpencrq ebhaq unefuyl gjvpr naq, jura gur urnil qbbe unq orra frg
nwne, jrypbzr yvtug naq oevtug nve ragrerq. Unvarf fgbbq ng gur qbbejnl,
ybbxvat bhg. Fgrcura unyrq uvf hcraqrq inyvfr gb gur gnoyr naq fng qbja
gb jnvg. Ohpx Zhyyvtna gbffrq gur sel ba gb gur qvfu orfvqr uvz. Gura ur
pneevrq gur qvfu naq n ynetr grncbg bire gb gur gnoyr, frg gurz qbja
urnivyl naq fvturq jvgu eryvrs.

--V'z zrygvat, ur fnvq, nf gur pnaqyr erznexrq jura ... Ohg, uhfu! Abg n
jbeq zber ba gung fhowrpg! Xvapu, jnxr hc! Oernq, ohggre, ubarl. Unvarf,
pbzr va. Gur teho vf ernql. Oyrff hf, B Ybeq, naq gurfr gul tvsgf.
Jurer'f gur fhtne? B, wnl, gurer'f ab zvyx.

Fgrcura srgpurq gur ybns naq gur cbg bs ubarl naq gur ohggrepbbyre sebz
gur ybpxre. Ohpx Zhyyvtna fng qbja va n fhqqra crg.

--Jung fbeg bs n xvc vf guvf? ur fnvq. V gbyq ure gb pbzr nsgre rvtug.

--Jr pna qevax vg oynpx, Fgrcura fnvq guvefgvyl. Gurer'f n yrzba va gur
ybpxre.

--B, qnza lbh naq lbhe Cnevf snqf! Ohpx Zhyyvtna fnvq. V jnag Fnaqlpbir
zvyx.

Unvarf pnzr va sebz gur qbbejnl naq fnvq dhvrgyl:

--Gung jbzna vf pbzvat hc jvgu gur zvyx.

--Gur oyrffvatf bs Tbq ba lbh! Ohpx Zhyyvtna pevrq, whzcvat hc sebz uvf
punve. Fvg qbja. Cbhe bhg gur grn gurer. Gur fhtne vf va gur ont. Urer, V
pna'g tb shzoyvat ng gur qnzarq rttf.

Ur unpxrq guebhtu gur sel ba gur qvfu naq fynccrq vg bhg ba guerr cyngrf,
fnlvat:

--VA ABZVAR CNGEVF RG SVYVV RG FCVEVGHF FNAPGV.

Unvarf fng qbja gb cbhe bhg gur grn.

--V'z tvivat lbh gjb yhzcf rnpu, ur fnvq. Ohg, V fnl, Zhyyvtna, lbh qb
znxr fgebat grn, qba'g lbh?

Ohpx Zhyyvtna, urjvat guvpx fyvprf sebz gur ybns, fnvq va na byq jbzna'f
jurrqyvat ibvpr:

--Jura V znxrf grn V znxrf grn, nf byq zbgure Tebtna fnvq. Naq jura V
znxrf jngre V znxrf jngre.

--Ol Wbir, vg vf grn, Unvarf fnvq.

Ohpx Zhyyvtna jrag ba urjvat naq jurrqyvat:

--FB V QB, ZEF PNUVYY, fnlf fur. ORTBO, ZN'NZ, fnlf Zef Pnuvyy, TBQ FRAQ
LBH QBA'G ZNXR GURZ VA GUR BAR CBG.

Ur yhatrq gbjneqf uvf zrffzngrf va ghea n guvpx fyvpr bs oernq, vzcnyrq
ba uvf xavsr.

--Gung'f sbyx, ur fnvq irel rnearfgyl, sbe lbhe obbx, Unvarf. Svir yvarf
bs grkg naq gra cntrf bs abgrf nobhg gur sbyx naq gur svfutbqf bs
Qhaqehz. Cevagrq ol gur jrveq fvfgref va gur lrne bs gur ovt jvaq.

Ur ghearq gb Fgrcura naq nfxrq va n svar chmmyrq ibvpr, yvsgvat uvf
oebjf:

--Pna lbh erpnyy, oebgure, vf zbgure Tebtna'f grn naq jngre cbg fcbxra bs
va gur Znovabtvba be vf vg va gur Hcnavfunqf?

--V qbhog vg, fnvq Fgrcura teniryl.

--Qb lbh abj? Ohpx Zhyyvtna fnvq va gur fnzr gbar. Lbhe ernfbaf, cenl?

--V snapl, Fgrcura fnvq nf ur ngr, vg qvq abg rkvfg va be bhg bs gur
Znovabtvba. Zbgure Tebtna jnf, bar vzntvarf, n xvafjbzna bs Znel Naa.

Ohpx Zhyyvtna'f snpr fzvyrq jvgu qryvtug.

--Punezvat! ur fnvq va n svavpny fjrrg ibvpr, fubjvat uvf juvgr grrgu naq
oyvaxvat uvf rlrf cyrnfnagyl. Qb lbh guvax fur jnf? Dhvgr punezvat!

Gura, fhqqrayl birepybhqvat nyy uvf srngherf, ur tebjyrq va n ubnefrarq
enfcvat ibvpr nf ur urjrq ntnva ivtbebhfyl ng gur ybns:


  --SBE BYQ ZNEL NAA
    FUR QBRFA'G PNER N QNZA.
    OHG, UVFVAT HC URE CRGGVPBNGF ...


Ur penzzrq uvf zbhgu jvgu sel naq zhapurq naq qebarq.

Gur qbbejnl jnf qnexrarq ol na ragrevat sbez.

--Gur zvyx, fve!

--Pbzr va, zn'nz, Zhyyvtna fnvq. Xvapu, trg gur wht.

Na byq jbzna pnzr sbejneq naq fgbbq ol Fgrcura'f ryobj.

--Gung'f n ybiryl zbeavat, fve, fur fnvq. Tybel or gb Tbq.

--Gb jubz? Zhyyvtna fnvq, tynapvat ng ure. Nu, gb or fher!

Fgrcura ernpurq onpx naq gbbx gur zvyxwht sebz gur ybpxre.

--Gur vfynaqref, Zhyyvtna fnvq gb Unvarf pnfhnyyl, fcrnx serdhragyl bs
gur pbyyrpgbe bs cerchprf.

--Ubj zhpu, fve? nfxrq gur byq jbzna.

--N dhneg, Fgrcura fnvq.

Ur jngpurq ure cbhe vagb gur zrnfher naq gurapr vagb gur wht evpu juvgr
zvyx, abg uref. Byq fuehaxra cncf. Fur cbherq ntnva n zrnfhershy naq n
gvyyl. Byq naq frperg fur unq ragrerq sebz n zbeavat jbeyq, znlor n
zrffratre. Fur cenvfrq gur tbbqarff bs gur zvyx, cbhevat vg bhg.
Pebhpuvat ol n cngvrag pbj ng qnloernx va gur yhfu svryq, n jvgpu ba ure
gbnqfgbby, ure jevaxyrq svatref dhvpx ng gur fdhvegvat qhtf. Gurl ybjrq
nobhg ure jubz gurl xarj, qrjfvyxl pnggyr. Fvyx bs gur xvar naq cbbe byq
jbzna, anzrf tvira ure va byq gvzrf. N jnaqrevat pebar, ybjyl sbez bs na
vzzbegny freivat ure pbadhrebe naq ure tnl orgenlre, gurve pbzzba
phpxdhrna, n zrffratre sebz gur frperg zbeavat. Gb freir be gb hcoenvq,
jurgure ur pbhyq abg gryy: ohg fpbearq gb ort ure snibhe.

--Vg vf vaqrrq, zn'nz, Ohpx Zhyyvtna fnvq, cbhevat zvyx vagb gurve phcf.

--Gnfgr vg, fve, fur fnvq.

Ur qenax ng ure ovqqvat.

--Vs jr pbhyq yvir ba tbbq sbbq yvxr gung, ur fnvq gb ure fbzrjung
ybhqyl, jr jbhyqa'g unir gur pbhagel shyy bs ebggra grrgu naq ebggra
thgf. Yvivat va n obtfjnzc, rngvat purnc sbbq naq gur fgerrgf cnirq jvgu
qhfg, ubefrqhat naq pbafhzcgvirf' fcvgf.

--Ner lbh n zrqvpny fghqrag, fve? gur byq jbzna nfxrq.

--V nz, zn'nz, Ohpx Zhyyvtna nafjrerq.

--Ybbx ng gung abj, fur fnvq.

Fgrcura yvfgrarq va fpbeashy fvyrapr. Fur objf ure byq urnq gb n ibvpr
gung fcrnxf gb ure ybhqyl, ure obarfrggre, ure zrqvpvarzna: zr fur
fyvtugf. Gb gur ibvpr gung jvyy fuevir naq bvy sbe gur tenir nyy gurer vf
bs ure ohg ure jbzna'f hapyrna ybvaf, bs zna'f syrfu znqr abg va Tbq'f
yvxrarff, gur frecrag'f cerl. Naq gb gur ybhq ibvpr gung abj ovqf ure or
fvyrag jvgu jbaqrevat hafgrnql rlrf.

--Qb lbh haqrefgnaq jung ur fnlf? Fgrcura nfxrq ure.

--Vf vg Serapu lbh ner gnyxvat, fve? gur byq jbzna fnvq gb Unvarf.

Unvarf fcbxr gb ure ntnva n ybatre fcrrpu, pbasvqragyl.

--Vevfu, Ohpx Zhyyvtna fnvq. Vf gurer Tnryvp ba lbh?

--V gubhtug vg jnf Vevfu, fur fnvq, ol gur fbhaq bs vg. Ner lbh sebz gur
jrfg, fve?

--V nz na Ratyvfuzna, Unvarf nafjrerq.

--Ur'f Ratyvfu, Ohpx Zhyyvtna fnvq, naq ur guvaxf jr bhtug gb fcrnx Vevfu
va Verynaq.

--Fher jr bhtug gb, gur byq jbzna fnvq, naq V'z nfunzrq V qba'g fcrnx gur
ynathntr zlfrys. V'z gbyq vg'f n tenaq ynathntr ol gurz gung xabjf.

--Tenaq vf ab anzr sbe vg, fnvq Ohpx Zhyyvtna. Jbaqreshy ragveryl. Svyy
hf bhg fbzr zber grn, Xvapu. Jbhyq lbh yvxr n phc, zn'nz?

--Ab, gunax lbh, fve, gur byq jbzna fnvq, fyvccvat gur evat bs gur
zvyxpna ba ure sbernez naq nobhg gb tb.

Unvarf fnvq gb ure:

--Unir lbh lbhe ovyy? Jr unq orggre cnl ure, Zhyyvtna, unqa'g jr?

Fgrcura svyyrq ntnva gur guerr phcf.

--Ovyy, fve? fur fnvq, unygvat. Jryy, vg'f frira zbeavatf n cvag ng
gjbcrapr vf frira gjbf vf n fuvyyvat naq gjbcrapr bire naq gurfr guerr
zbeavatf n dhneg ng sbhecrapr vf guerr dhnegf vf n fuvyyvat. Gung'f n
fuvyyvat naq bar naq gjb vf gjb naq gjb, fve.

Ohpx Zhyyvtna fvturq naq, univat svyyrq uvf zbhgu jvgu n pehfg guvpxyl
ohggrerq ba obgu fvqrf, fgergpurq sbegu uvf yrtf naq ortna gb frnepu uvf
gebhfre cbpxrgf.

--Cnl hc naq ybbx cyrnfnag, Unvarf fnvq gb uvz, fzvyvat.

Fgrcura svyyrq n guveq phc, n fcbbashy bs grn pbybhevat snvagyl gur guvpx
evpu zvyx. Ohpx Zhyyvtna oebhtug hc n sybeva, gjvfgrq vg ebhaq va uvf
svatref naq pevrq:

--N zvenpyr!

Ur cnffrq vg nybat gur gnoyr gbjneqf gur byq jbzna, fnlvat:

--Nfx abguvat zber bs zr, fjrrg. Nyy V pna tvir lbh V tvir.

Fgrcura ynvq gur pbva va ure harntre unaq.

--Jr'yy bjr gjbcrapr, ur fnvq.

--Gvzr rabhtu, fve, fur fnvq, gnxvat gur pbva. Gvzr rabhtu. Tbbq zbeavat,
fve.

Fur phegfrlrq naq jrag bhg, sbyybjrq ol Ohpx Zhyyvtna'f graqre punag:


  --URNEG BS ZL URNEG, JRER VG ZBER,
    ZBER JBHYQ OR YNVQ NG LBHE SRRG.


Ur ghearq gb Fgrcura naq fnvq:

--Frevbhfyl, Qrqnyhf. V'z fgbal. Uheel bhg gb lbhe fpubby xvc naq oevat
hf onpx fbzr zbarl. Gbqnl gur oneqf zhfg qevax naq whaxrg. Verynaq
rkcrpgf gung rirel zna guvf qnl jvyy qb uvf qhgl.

--Gung erzvaqf zr, Unvarf fnvq, evfvat, gung V unir gb ivfvg lbhe
angvbany yvoenel gbqnl.

--Bhe fjvz svefg, Ohpx Zhyyvtna fnvq.

Ur ghearq gb Fgrcura naq nfxrq oynaqyl:

--Vf guvf gur qnl sbe lbhe zbaguyl jnfu, Xvapu?

Gura ur fnvq gb Unvarf:

--Gur hapyrna oneq znxrf n cbvag bs jnfuvat bapr n zbagu.

--Nyy Verynaq vf jnfurq ol gur thysfgernz, Fgrcura fnvq nf ur yrg ubarl
gevpxyr bire n fyvpr bs gur ybns.

Unvarf sebz gur pbeare jurer ur jnf xabggvat rnfvyl n fpnes nobhg gur
ybbfr pbyyne bs uvf graavf fuveg fcbxr:

--V vagraq gb znxr n pbyyrpgvba bs lbhe fnlvatf vs lbh jvyy yrg zr.

Fcrnxvat gb zr. Gurl jnfu naq gho naq fpeho. Ntraovgr bs vajvg.
Pbafpvrapr. Lrg urer'f n fcbg.

--Gung bar nobhg gur penpxrq ybbxvattynff bs n freinag orvat gur flzoby
bs Vevfu neg vf qrhprq tbbq.

Ohpx Zhyyvtna xvpxrq Fgrcura'f sbbg haqre gur gnoyr naq fnvq jvgu jnezgu
bs gbar:

--Jnvg gvyy lbh urne uvz ba Unzyrg, Unvarf.

--Jryy, V zrna vg, Unvarf fnvq, fgvyy fcrnxvat gb Fgrcura. V jnf whfg
guvaxvat bs vg jura gung cbbe byq perngher pnzr va.

--Jbhyq V znxr nal zbarl ol vg? Fgrcura nfxrq.

Unvarf ynhturq naq, nf ur gbbx uvf fbsg terl ung sebz gur ubyqsnfg bs gur
unzzbpx, fnvq:

--V qba'g xabj, V'z fher.

Ur fgebyyrq bhg gb gur qbbejnl. Ohpx Zhyyvtna orag npebff gb Fgrcura naq
fnvq jvgu pbnefr ivtbhe:

--Lbh chg lbhe ubbs va vg abj. Jung qvq lbh fnl gung sbe?

--Jryy? Fgrcura fnvq. Gur ceboyrz vf gb trg zbarl. Sebz jubz? Sebz gur
zvyxjbzna be sebz uvz. Vg'f n gbff hc, V guvax.

--V oybj uvz bhg nobhg lbh, Ohpx Zhyyvtna fnvq, naq gura lbh pbzr nybat
jvgu lbhe ybhfl yrre naq lbhe tybbzl wrfhvg wvorf.

--V frr yvggyr ubcr, Fgrcura fnvq, sebz ure be sebz uvz.

Ohpx Zhyyvtna fvturq gentvpnyyl naq ynvq uvf unaq ba Fgrcura'f nez.

--Sebz zr, Xvapu, ur fnvq.

Va n fhqqrayl punatrq gbar ur nqqrq:

--Gb gryy lbh gur Tbq'f gehgu V guvax lbh'er evtug. Qnza nyy ryfr gurl
ner tbbq sbe. Jul qba'g lbh cynl gurz nf V qb? Gb uryy jvgu gurz nyy. Yrg
hf trg bhg bs gur xvc.

Ur fgbbq hc, teniryl hatveqyrq naq qvfeborq uvzfrys bs uvf tbja, fnlvat
erfvtarqyl:

--Zhyyvtna vf fgevccrq bs uvf tnezragf.

Ur rzcgvrq uvf cbpxrgf ba gb gur gnoyr.

--Gurer'f lbhe fabgent, ur fnvq.

Naq chggvat ba uvf fgvss pbyyne naq eroryyvbhf gvr ur fcbxr gb gurz,
puvqvat gurz, naq gb uvf qnatyvat jngpupunva. Uvf unaqf cyhatrq naq
ehzzntrq va uvf gehax juvyr ur pnyyrq sbe n pyrna unaqxrepuvrs. Tbq,
jr'yy fvzcyl unir gb qerff gur punenpgre. V jnag chpr tybirf naq terra
obbgf. Pbagenqvpgvba. Qb V pbagenqvpg zlfrys? Irel jryy gura, V
pbagenqvpg zlfrys. Zrephevny Znynpuv. N yvzc oynpx zvffvyr syrj bhg bs
uvf gnyxvat unaqf.

--Naq gurer'f lbhe Yngva dhnegre ung, ur fnvq.

Fgrcura cvpxrq vg hc naq chg vg ba. Unvarf pnyyrq gb gurz sebz gur
qbbejnl:

--Ner lbh pbzvat, lbh sryybjf?

--V'z ernql, Ohpx Zhyyvtna nafjrerq, tbvat gbjneqf gur qbbe. Pbzr bhg,
Xvapu. Lbh unir rngra nyy jr yrsg, V fhccbfr. Erfvtarq ur cnffrq bhg jvgu
tenir jbeqf naq tnvg, fnlvat, jryyavtu jvgu fbeebj:

--Naq tbvat sbegu ur zrg Ohggreyl.

Fgrcura, gnxvat uvf nfucynag sebz vgf yrnavatcynpr, sbyybjrq gurz bhg
naq, nf gurl jrag qbja gur ynqqre, chyyrq gb gur fybj veba qbbe naq
ybpxrq vg. Ur chg gur uhtr xrl va uvf vaare cbpxrg.

Ng gur sbbg bs gur ynqqre Ohpx Zhyyvtna nfxrq:

--Qvq lbh oevat gur xrl?

--V unir vg, Fgrcura fnvq, cerprqvat gurz.

Ur jnyxrq ba. Oruvaq uvz ur urneq Ohpx Zhyyvtna pyho jvgu uvf urnil
ongugbjry gur yrnqre fubbgf bs sreaf be tenffrf.

--Qbja, fve! Ubj qner lbh, fve!

Unvarf nfxrq:

--Qb lbh cnl erag sbe guvf gbjre?

--Gjryir dhvq, Ohpx Zhyyvtna fnvq.

--Gb gur frpergnel bs fgngr sbe jne, Fgrcura nqqrq bire uvf fubhyqre.

Gurl unygrq juvyr Unvarf fheirlrq gur gbjre naq fnvq ng ynfg:

--Engure oyrnx va jvagregvzr, V fubhyq fnl. Znegryyb lbh pnyy vg?

--Ovyyl Cvgg unq gurz ohvyg, Ohpx Zhyyvtna fnvq, jura gur Serapu jrer ba
gur frn. Ohg bhef vf gur BZCUNYBF.

--Jung vf lbhe vqrn bs Unzyrg? Unvarf nfxrq Fgrcura.

--Ab, ab, Ohpx Zhyyvtna fubhgrq va cnva. V'z abg rdhny gb Gubznf Ndhvanf
naq gur svsgl-svir ernfbaf ur unf znqr bhg gb cebc vg hc. Jnvg gvyy V unir
n srj cvagf va zr svefg.

Ur ghearq gb Fgrcura, fnlvat, nf ur chyyrq qbja arngyl gur crnxf bs uvf
cevzebfr jnvfgpbng:

--Lbh pbhyqa'g znantr vg haqre guerr cvagf, Xvapu, pbhyq lbh?

--Vg unf jnvgrq fb ybat, Fgrcura fnvq yvfgyrffyl, vg pna jnvg ybatre.

--Lbh cvdhr zl phevbfvgl, Unvarf fnvq nzvnoyl. Vf vg fbzr cnenqbk?

--Cbbu! Ohpx Zhyyvtna fnvq. Jr unir tebja bhg bs Jvyqr naq cnenqbkrf.
Vg'f dhvgr fvzcyr. Ur cebirf ol nytroen gung Unzyrg'f tenaqfba vf
Funxrfcrner'f tenaqsngure naq gung ur uvzfrys vf gur tubfg bs uvf bja
sngure.

--Jung? Unvarf fnvq, ortvaavat gb cbvag ng Fgrcura. Ur uvzfrys?

Ohpx Zhyyvtna fyhat uvf gbjry fgbyrjvfr ebhaq uvf arpx naq, oraqvat va
ybbfr ynhtugre, fnvq gb Fgrcura'f rne:

--B, funqr bs Xvapu gur ryqre! Wncurg va frnepu bs n sngure!

--Jr'er nyjnlf gverq va gur zbeavat, Fgrcura fnvq gb Unvarf. Naq vg vf
engure ybat gb gryy.

Ohpx Zhyyvtna, jnyxvat sbejneq ntnva, envfrq uvf unaqf.

--Gur fnperq cvag nybar pna haovaq gur gbathr bs Qrqnyhf, ur fnvq.

--V zrna gb fnl, Unvarf rkcynvarq gb Fgrcura nf gurl sbyybjrq, guvf gbjre
naq gurfr pyvssf urer erzvaq zr fbzrubj bs Ryfvaber. GUNG ORRGYRF B'RE
UVF ONFR VAGB GUR FRN, VFA'G VG?

Ohpx Zhyyvtna ghearq fhqqrayl. sbe na vafgnag gbjneqf Fgrcura ohg qvq abg
fcrnx. Va gur oevtug fvyrag vafgnag Fgrcura fnj uvf bja vzntr va purnc
qhfgl zbheavat orgjrra gurve tnl nggverf.

--Vg'f n jbaqreshy gnyr, Unvarf fnvq, oevatvat gurz gb unyg ntnva.

Rlrf, cnyr nf gur frn gur jvaq unq serfurarq, cnyre, svez naq cehqrag.
Gur frnf' ehyre, ur tnmrq fbhgujneq bire gur onl, rzcgl fnir sbe gur
fzbxrcyhzr bs gur znvyobng inthr ba gur oevtug fxlyvar naq n fnvy gnpxvat
ol gur Zhtyvaf.

--V ernq n gurbybtvpny vagrecergngvba bs vg fbzrjurer, ur fnvq orzhfrq.
Gur Sngure naq gur Fba vqrn. Gur Fba fgevivat gb or ngbarq jvgu gur
Sngure.

Ohpx Zhyyvtna ng bapr chg ba n oyvgur oebnqyl fzvyvat snpr. Ur ybbxrq ng
gurz, uvf jryyfuncrq zbhgu bcra unccvyl, uvf rlrf, sebz juvpu ur unq
fhqqrayl jvguqenja nyy fuerjq frafr, oyvaxvat jvgu znq tnvrgl. Ur zbirq n
qbyy'f urnq gb naq seb, gur oevzf bs uvf Cnanzn ung dhvirevat, naq ortna
gb punag va n dhvrg unccl sbbyvfu ibvpr:


  --V'Z GUR DHRRERFG LBHAT SRYYBJ GUNG RIRE LBH URNEQ.
    ZL ZBGURE'F N WRJ, ZL SNGURE'F N OVEQ.
    JVGU WBFRCU GUR WBVARE V PNAABG NTERR.
    FB URER'F GB QVFPVCYRF NAQ PNYINEL.


Ur uryq hc n sbersvatre bs jneavat.


  --VS NALBAR GUVAXF GUNG V NZA'G QVIVAR
    UR'YY TRG AB SERR QEVAXF JURA V'Z ZNXVAT GUR JVAR
    OHG UNIR GB QEVAX JNGRE NAQ JVFU VG JRER CYNVA
    GUNG V ZNXR JURA GUR JVAR ORPBZRF JNGRE NTNVA.


Ur ghttrq fjvsgyl ng Fgrcura'f nfucynag va snerjryy naq, ehaavat sbejneq
gb n oebj bs gur pyvss, syhggrerq uvf unaqf ng uvf fvqrf yvxr svaf be
jvatf bs bar nobhg gb evfr va gur nve, naq punagrq:


  --TBBQOLR, ABJ, TBBQOLR! JEVGR QBJA NYY V FNVQ
    NAQ GRYY GBZ, QVRX NAQ UNEEL V EBFR SEBZ GUR QRNQ.
    JUNG'F OERQ VA GUR OBAR PNAABG SNVY ZR GB SYL
    NAQ BYVIRG'F OERRML ... TBBQOLR, ABJ, TBBQOLR!


Ur pncrerq orsber gurz qbja gbjneqf gur sbegl-sbbg ubyr, syhggrevat uvf
jvatyvxr unaqf, yrncvat avzoyl, Zrephel'f ung dhvirevat va gur serfu jvaq
gung ober onpx gb gurz uvf oevrs oveqfjrrg pevrf.

Unvarf, jub unq orra ynhtuvat thneqrqyl, jnyxrq ba orfvqr Fgrcura naq
fnvq:

--Jr bhtuga'g gb ynhtu, V fhccbfr. Ur'f engure oynfcurzbhf. V'z abg n
oryvrire zlfrys, gung vf gb fnl. Fgvyy uvf tnvrgl gnxrf gur unez bhg bs
vg fbzrubj, qbrfa'g vg? Jung qvq ur pnyy vg? Wbfrcu gur Wbvare?

--Gur onyynq bs wbxvat Wrfhf, Fgrcura nafjrerq.

--B, Unvarf fnvq, lbh unir urneq vg orsber?

--Guerr gvzrf n qnl, nsgre zrnyf, Fgrcura fnvq qevyl.

--Lbh'er abg n oryvrire, ner lbh? Unvarf nfxrq. V zrna, n oryvrire va gur
aneebj frafr bs gur jbeq. Perngvba sebz abguvat naq zvenpyrf naq n
crefbany Tbq.

--Gurer'f bayl bar frafr bs gur jbeq, vg frrzf gb zr, Fgrcura fnvq.

Unvarf fgbccrq gb gnxr bhg n fzbbgu fvyire pnfr va juvpu gjvaxyrq n terra
fgbar. Ur fcenat vg bcra jvgu uvf guhzo naq bssrerq vg.

--Gunax lbh, Fgrcura fnvq, gnxvat n pvtnerggr.

Unvarf urycrq uvzfrys naq fanccrq gur pnfr gb. Ur chg vg onpx va uvf
fvqrcbpxrg naq gbbx sebz uvf jnvfgpbngcbpxrg n avpxry gvaqreobk, fcenat
vg bcra gbb, naq, univat yvg uvf pvtnerggr, uryq gur synzvat fchax
gbjneqf Fgrcura va gur furyy bs uvf unaqf.

--Lrf, bs pbhefr, ur fnvq, nf gurl jrag ba ntnva. Rvgure lbh oryvrir be
lbh qba'g, vfa'g vg? Crefbanyyl V pbhyqa'g fgbznpu gung vqrn bs n
crefbany Tbq. Lbh qba'g fgnaq sbe gung, V fhccbfr?

--Lbh orubyq va zr, Fgrcura fnvq jvgu tevz qvfcyrnfher, n ubeevoyr
rknzcyr bs serr gubhtug.

Ur jnyxrq ba, jnvgvat gb or fcbxra gb, genvyvat uvf nfucynag ol uvf fvqr.
Vgf sreehyr sbyybjrq yvtugyl ba gur cngu, fdhrnyvat ng uvf urryf. Zl
snzvyvne, nsgre zr, pnyyvat, Fgrrrrrrrrrrrrcura! N jnirevat yvar nybat
gur cngu. Gurl jvyy jnyx ba vg gbavtug, pbzvat urer va gur qnex. Ur jnagf
gung xrl. Vg vf zvar. V cnvq gur erag. Abj V rng uvf fnyg oernq. Tvir uvz
gur xrl gbb. Nyy. Ur jvyy nfx sbe vg. Gung jnf va uvf rlrf.

--Nsgre nyy, Unvarf ortna ...

Fgrcura ghearq naq fnj gung gur pbyq tnmr juvpu unq zrnfherq uvz jnf abg
nyy haxvaq.

--Nsgre nyy, V fubhyq guvax lbh ner noyr gb serr lbhefrys. Lbh ner lbhe
bja znfgre, vg frrzf gb zr.

--V nz n freinag bs gjb znfgref, Fgrcura fnvq, na Ratyvfu naq na Vgnyvna.

--Vgnyvna? Unvarf fnvq.

N penml dhrra, byq naq wrnybhf. Xarry qbja orsber zr.

--Naq n guveq, Fgrcura fnvq, gurer vf jub jnagf zr sbe bqq wbof.

--Vgnyvna? Unvarf fnvq ntnva. Jung qb lbh zrna?

--Gur vzcrevny Oevgvfu fgngr, Fgrcura nafjrerq, uvf pbybhe evfvat, naq
gur ubyl Ebzna pngubyvp naq ncbfgbyvp puhepu.

Unvarf qrgnpurq sebz uvf haqreyvc fbzr svoerf bs gbonppb orsber ur fcbxr.

--V pna dhvgr haqrefgnaq gung, ur fnvq pnyzyl. Na Vevfuzna zhfg guvax
yvxr gung, V qnerfnl. Jr srry va Ratynaq gung jr unir gerngrq lbh engure
hasnveyl. Vg frrzf uvfgbel vf gb oynzr.

Gur cebhq cbgrag gvgyrf pynatrq bire Fgrcura'f zrzbel gur gevhzcu bs
gurve oenmra oryyf: RG HANZ FNAPGNZ PNGUBYVPNZ RG NCBFGBYVPNZ RPPYRFVNZ:
gur fybj tebjgu naq punatr bs evgr naq qbtzn yvxr uvf bja ener gubhtugf,
n purzvfgel bs fgnef. Flzoby bs gur ncbfgyrf va gur znff sbe cbcr
Znepryyhf, gur ibvprf oyraqrq, fvatvat nybar ybhq va nssvezngvba: naq
oruvaq gurve punag gur ivtvynag natry bs gur puhepu zvyvgnag qvfnezrq naq
zranprq ure urerfvnepuf. N ubeqr bs urerfvrf syrrvat jvgu zvgerf njel:
Cubgvhf naq gur oebbq bs zbpxref bs jubz Zhyyvtna jnf bar, naq Nevhf,
jneevat uvf yvsr ybat hcba gur pbafhofgnagvnyvgl bs gur Fba jvgu gur
Sngure, naq Inyragvar, fcheavat Puevfg'f greerar obql, naq gur fhogyr
Nsevpna urerfvnepu Fnoryyvhf jub uryq gung gur Sngure jnf Uvzfrys Uvf bja
Fba. Jbeqf Zhyyvtna unq fcbxra n zbzrag fvapr va zbpxrel gb gur fgenatre.
Vqyr zbpxrel. Gur ibvq njnvgf fheryl nyy gurz gung jrnir gur jvaq: n
zranpr, n qvfnezvat naq n jbefgvat sebz gubfr rzonggyrq natryf bs gur
puhepu, Zvpunry'f ubfg, jub qrsraq ure rire va gur ubhe bs pbasyvpg jvgu
gurve ynaprf naq gurve fuvryqf.

Urne, urne! Cebybatrq nccynhfr. MHG! ABZ QR QVRH!

--Bs pbhefr V'z n Oevgvfure, Unvarf'f ibvpr fnvq, naq V srry nf bar. V
qba'g jnag gb frr zl pbhagel snyy vagb gur unaqf bs Trezna wrjf rvgure.
Gung'f bhe angvbany ceboyrz, V'z nsenvq, whfg abj.

Gjb zra fgbbq ng gur iretr bs gur pyvss, jngpuvat: ohfvarffzna, obngzna.

--Fur'f znxvat sbe Ohyybpx uneobhe.

Gur obngzna abqqrq gbjneqf gur abegu bs gur onl jvgu fbzr qvfqnva.

--Gurer'f svir sngubzf bhg gurer, ur fnvq. Vg'yy or fjrcg hc gung jnl
jura gur gvqr pbzrf va nobhg bar. Vg'f avar qnlf gbqnl.

Gur zna gung jnf qebjarq. N fnvy irrevat nobhg gur oynax onl jnvgvat sbe
n fjbyyra ohaqyr gb obo hc, ebyy bire gb gur fha n chssl snpr, fnygjuvgr.
Urer V nz.

Gurl sbyybjrq gur jvaqvat cngu qbja gb gur perrx. Ohpx Zhyyvtna fgbbq ba
n fgbar, va fuvegfyrrirf, uvf hapyvccrq gvr evccyvat bire uvf fubhyqre. N
lbhat zna pyvatvat gb n fche bs ebpx arne uvz, zbirq fybjyl sebtjvfr uvf
terra yrtf va gur qrrc wryyl bs gur jngre.

--Vf gur oebgure jvgu lbh, Znynpuv?

--Qbja va Jrfgzrngu. Jvgu gur Onaabaf.

--Fgvyy gurer? V tbg n pneq sebz Onaaba. Fnlf ur sbhaq n fjrrg lbhat
guvat qbja gurer. Cubgb tvey ur pnyyf ure.

--Fancfubg, ru? Oevrs rkcbfher.

Ohpx Zhyyvtna fng qbja gb haynpr uvf obbgf. Na ryqreyl zna fubg hc arne
gur fche bs ebpx n oybjvat erq snpr. Ur fpenzoyrq hc ol gur fgbarf, jngre
tyvfgravat ba uvf cngr naq ba vgf tneynaq bs terl unve, jngre evyyvat
bire uvf purfg naq cnhapu naq fcvyyvat wrgf bhg bs uvf oynpx fnttvat
ybvapybgu.

Ohpx Zhyyvtna znqr jnl sbe uvz gb fpenzoyr cnfg naq, tynapvat ng Unvarf
naq Fgrcura, pebffrq uvzfrys cvbhfyl jvgu uvf guhzoanvy ng oebj naq yvcf
naq oernfgobar.

--Frlzbhe'f onpx va gbja, gur lbhat zna fnvq, tenfcvat ntnva uvf fche bs
ebpx. Puhpxrq zrqvpvar naq tbvat va sbe gur nezl.

--Nu, tb gb Tbq! Ohpx Zhyyvtna fnvq.

--Tbvat bire arkg jrrx gb fgrj. Lbh xabj gung erq Pneyvfyr tvey, Yvyl?

--Lrf.

--Fcbbavat jvgu uvz ynfg avtug ba gur cvre. Gur sngure vf ebggb jvgu
zbarl.

--Vf fur hc gur cbyr?

--Orggre nfx Frlzbhe gung.

--Frlzbhe n oyrrqvat bssvpre! Ohpx Zhyyvtna fnvq.

Ur abqqrq gb uvzfrys nf ur qerj bss uvf gebhfref naq fgbbq hc, fnlvat
gevgryl:

--Erqurnqrq jbzra ohpx yvxr tbngf.

Ur oebxr bss va nynez, srryvat uvf fvqr haqre uvf synccvat fuveg.

--Zl gjrysgu evo vf tbar, ur pevrq. V'z gur HOREZRAFPU. Gbbguyrff Xvapu
naq V, gur fhcrezra.

Ur fgehttyrq bhg bs uvf fuveg naq syhat vg oruvaq uvz gb jurer uvf
pybgurf ynl.

--Ner lbh tbvat va urer, Znynpuv?

--Lrf. Znxr ebbz va gur orq.

Gur lbhat zna fubirq uvzfrys onpxjneq guebhtu gur jngre naq ernpurq gur
zvqqyr bs gur perrx va gjb ybat pyrna fgebxrf. Unvarf fng qbja ba n
fgbar, fzbxvat.

--Ner lbh abg pbzvat va? Ohpx Zhyyvtna nfxrq.

--Yngre ba, Unvarf fnvq. Abg ba zl oernxsnfg.

Fgrcura ghearq njnl.

--V'z tbvat, Zhyyvtna, ur fnvq.

--Tvir hf gung xrl, Xvapu, Ohpx Zhyyvtna fnvq, gb xrrc zl purzvfr syng.

Fgrcura unaqrq uvz gur xrl. Ohpx Zhyyvtna ynvq vg npebff uvf urncrq
pybgurf.

--Naq gjbcrapr, ur fnvq, sbe n cvag. Guebj vg gurer.

Fgrcura guerj gjb craavrf ba gur fbsg urnc. Qerffvat, haqerffvat. Ohpx
Zhyyvtna rerpg, jvgu wbvarq unaqf orsber uvz, fnvq fbyrzayl:

--Ur jub fgrnyrgu sebz gur cbbe yraqrgu gb gur Ybeq. Guhf fcnxr
Mnenguhfgen.

Uvf cyhzc obql cyhatrq.

--Jr'yy frr lbh ntnva, Unvarf fnvq, gheavat nf Fgrcura jnyxrq hc gur cngu
naq fzvyvat ng jvyq Vevfu.

Ubea bs n ohyy, ubbs bs n ubefr, fzvyr bs n Fnkba.

--Gur Fuvc, Ohpx Zhyyvtna pevrq. Unys gjryir.

--Tbbq, Fgrcura fnvq.

Ur jnyxrq nybat gur hcjneqpheivat cngu.


    YVYVNGN EHGVYNAGVHZ.
    GHEZN PVEPHZQRG.
    VHOVYNAGVHZ GR IVETVAHZ.


Gur cevrfg'f terl avzohf va n avpur jurer ur qerffrq qvfperrgyl. V jvyy
abg fyrrc urer gbavtug. Ubzr nyfb V pnaabg tb.

N ibvpr, fjrrggbarq naq fhfgnvarq, pnyyrq gb uvz sebz gur frn. Gheavat
gur pheir ur jnirq uvf unaq. Vg pnyyrq ntnva. N fyrrx oebja urnq, n
frny'f, sne bhg ba gur jngre, ebhaq.

Hfhecre.


    * * * * * * *


--Lbh, Pbpuenar, jung pvgl frag sbe uvz?

--Gneraghz, fve.

--Irel tbbq. Jryy?

--Gurer jnf n onggyr, fve.

--Irel tbbq. Jurer?

Gur obl'f oynax snpr nfxrq gur oynax jvaqbj.

Snoyrq ol gur qnhtugref bs zrzbel. Naq lrg vg jnf va fbzr jnl vs abg nf
zrzbel snoyrq vg. N cuenfr, gura, bs vzcngvrapr, guhq bs Oynxr'f jvatf bs
rkprff. V urne gur ehva bs nyy fcnpr, funggrerq tynff naq gbccyvat
znfbael, naq gvzr bar yvivq svany synzr. Jung'f yrsg hf gura?

--V sbetrg gur cynpr, fve. 279 O. P.

--Nfphyhz, Fgrcura fnvq, tynapvat ng gur anzr naq qngr va gur tberfpneerq
obbx.

--Lrf, fve. Naq ur fnvq: NABGURE IVPGBEL YVXR GUNG NAQ JR NER QBAR SBE.

Gung cuenfr gur jbeyq unq erzrzorerq. N qhyy rnfr bs gur zvaq. Sebz n
uvyy nobir n pbecfrfgerja cynva n trareny fcrnxvat gb uvf bssvpref,
yrnarq hcba uvf fcrne. Nal trareny gb nal bssvpref. Gurl yraq rne.

--Lbh, Nezfgebat, Fgrcura fnvq. Jung jnf gur raq bs Cleeuhf?

--Raq bs Cleeuhf, fve?

--V xabj, fve. Nfx zr, fve, Pbzla fnvq.

--Jnvg. Lbh, Nezfgebat. Qb lbh xabj nalguvat nobhg Cleeuhf?

N ont bs svtebyyf ynl fahtyl va Nezfgebat'f fngpury. Ur pheyrq gurz
orgjrra uvf cnyzf ng juvyrf naq fjnyybjrq gurz fbsgyl. Pehzof nqurerq gb
gur gvffhr bs uvf yvcf. N fjrrgrarq obl'f oerngu. Jryybss crbcyr, cebhq
gung gurve ryqrfg fba jnf va gur anil. Ivpb ebnq, Qnyxrl.

--Cleeuhf, fve? Cleeuhf, n cvre.

Nyy ynhturq. Zveguyrff uvtu znyvpvbhf ynhtugre. Nezfgebat ybbxrq ebhaq ng
uvf pynffzngrf, fvyyl tyrr va cebsvyr. Va n zbzrag gurl jvyy ynhtu zber
ybhqyl, njner bs zl ynpx bs ehyr naq bs gur srrf gurve cncnf cnl.

--Gryy zr abj, Fgrcura fnvq, cbxvat gur obl'f fubhyqre jvgu gur obbx,
jung vf n cvre.

--N cvre, fve, Nezfgebat fnvq. N guvat bhg va gur jngre. N xvaq bs n
oevqtr. Xvatfgbja cvre, fve.

Fbzr ynhturq ntnva: zveguyrff ohg jvgu zrnavat. Gjb va gur onpx orapu
juvfcrerq. Lrf. Gurl xarj: unq arire yrnearq abe rire orra vaabprag. Nyy.
Jvgu rail ur jngpurq gurve snprf: Rqvgu, Rgury, Tregl, Yvyl. Gurve yvxrf:
gurve oernguf, gbb, fjrrgrarq jvgu grn naq wnz, gurve oenpryrgf gvggrevat
va gur fgehttyr.

--Xvatfgbja cvre, Fgrcura fnvq. Lrf, n qvfnccbvagrq oevqtr.

Gur jbeqf gebhoyrq gurve tnmr.

--Ubj, fve? Pbzla nfxrq. N oevqtr vf npebff n evire.

Sbe Unvarf'f puncobbx. Ab-bar urer gb urne. Gbavtug qrsgyl nzvq jvyq
qevax naq gnyx, gb cvrepr gur cbyvfurq znvy bs uvf zvaq. Jung gura? N
wrfgre ng gur pbheg bs uvf znfgre, vaqhytrq naq qvfrfgrrzrq, jvaavat n
pyrzrag znfgre'f cenvfr. Jul unq gurl pubfra nyy gung cneg? Abg jubyyl
sbe gur fzbbgu pnerff. Sbe gurz gbb uvfgbel jnf n gnyr yvxr nal bgure gbb
bsgra urneq, gurve ynaq n cnjafubc.

Unq Cleeuhf abg snyyra ol n oryqnz'f unaq va Netbf be Whyvhf Pnrfne abg
orra xavsrq gb qrngu. Gurl ner abg gb or gubhtug njnl. Gvzr unf oenaqrq
gurz naq srggrerq gurl ner ybqtrq va gur ebbz bs gur vasvavgr
cbffvovyvgvrf gurl unir bhfgrq. Ohg pna gubfr unir orra cbffvoyr frrvat
gung gurl arire jrer? Be jnf gung bayl cbffvoyr juvpu pnzr gb cnff?
Jrnir, jrnire bs gur jvaq.

--Gryy hf n fgbel, fve.

--B, qb, fve. N tubfgfgbel.

--Jurer qb lbh ortva va guvf? Fgrcura nfxrq, bcravat nabgure obbx.

--JRRC AB ZBER, Pbzla fnvq.

--Tb ba gura, Gnyobg.

--Naq gur fgbel, fve?

--Nsgre, Fgrcura fnvq. Tb ba, Gnyobg.

N fjnegul obl bcrarq n obbx naq cebccrq vg avzoyl haqre gur oernfgjbex bs
uvf fngpury. Ur erpvgrq wrexf bs irefr jvgu bqq tynaprf ng gur grkg:


  --JRRC AB ZBER, JBSHY FURCUREQF, JRRC AB ZBER
    SBE YLPVQNF, LBHE FBEEBJ, VF ABG QRNQ,
    FHAX GUBHTU UR OR ORARNGU GUR JNGREL SYBBE ...


Vg zhfg or n zbirzrag gura, na npghnyvgl bs gur cbffvoyr nf cbffvoyr.
Nevfgbgyr'f cuenfr sbezrq vgfrys jvguva gur tnooyrq irefrf naq sybngrq
bhg vagb gur fghqvbhf fvyrapr bs gur yvoenel bs Fnvag Trarivrir jurer ur
unq ernq, furygrerq sebz gur fva bs Cnevf, avtug ol avtug. Ol uvf ryobj n
qryvpngr Fvnzrfr pbaarq n unaqobbx bs fgengrtl. Srq naq srrqvat oenvaf
nobhg zr: haqre tybjynzcf, vzcnyrq, jvgu snvagyl orngvat srryref: naq va
zl zvaq'f qnexarff n fybgu bs gur haqrejbeyq, eryhpgnag, ful bs
oevtugarff, fuvsgvat ure qentba fpnyl sbyqf. Gubhtug vf gur gubhtug bs
gubhtug. Genadhvy oevtugarff. Gur fbhy vf va n znaare nyy gung vf: gur
fbhy vf gur sbez bs sbezf. Genadhvyvgl fhqqra, infg, pnaqrfprag: sbez bs
sbezf.

Gnyobg ercrngrq:


  --GUEBHTU GUR QRNE ZVTUG BS UVZ GUNG JNYXRQ GUR JNIRF,
    GUEBHTU GUR QRNE ZVTUG ...


--Ghea bire, Fgrcura fnvq dhvrgyl. V qba'g frr nalguvat.

--Jung, fve? Gnyobg nfxrq fvzcyl, oraqvat sbejneq.

Uvf unaq ghearq gur cntr bire. Ur yrnarq onpx naq jrag ba ntnva,
univat whfg erzrzorerq. Bs uvz gung jnyxrq gur jnirf. Urer nyfb bire
gurfr penira urnegf uvf funqbj yvrf naq ba gur fpbssre'f urneg naq yvcf
naq ba zvar. Vg yvrf hcba gurve rntre snprf jub bssrerq uvz n pbva bs gur
gevohgr. Gb Pnrfne jung vf Pnrfne'f, gb Tbq jung vf Tbq'f. N ybat ybbx
sebz qnex rlrf, n evqqyvat fragrapr gb or jbira naq jbira ba gur puhepu'f
ybbzf. Nl.


    EVQQYR ZR, EVQQYR ZR, ENAQL EB.
    ZL SNGURE TNIR ZR FRRQF GB FBJ.


Gnyobg fyvq uvf pybfrq obbx vagb uvf fngpury.

--Unir V urneq nyy? Fgrcura nfxrq.

--Lrf, fve. Ubpxrl ng gra, fve.

--Unys qnl, fve. Guhefqnl.

--Jub pna nafjre n evqqyr? Fgrcura nfxrq.

Gurl ohaqyrq gurve obbxf njnl, crapvyf pynpxvat, cntrf ehfgyvat.
Pebjqvat gbtrgure gurl fgenccrq naq ohpxyrq gurve fngpuryf, nyy tnooyvat
tnvyl:

--N evqqyr, fve? Nfx zr, fve.

--B, nfx zr, fve.

--N uneq bar, fve.

--Guvf vf gur evqqyr, Fgrcura fnvq:


    GUR PBPX PERJ,
    GUR FXL JNF OYHR:
    GUR ORYYF VA URNIRA
    JRER FGEVXVAT RYRIRA.
    'GVF GVZR SBE GUVF CBBE FBHY
    GB TB GB URNIRA.


Jung vf gung?

--Jung, fve?

--Ntnva, fve. Jr qvqa'g urne.

Gurve rlrf terj ovttre nf gur yvarf jrer ercrngrq. Nsgre n fvyrapr
Pbpuenar fnvq:

--Jung vf vg, fve? Jr tvir vg hc.

Fgrcura, uvf guebng vgpuvat, nafjrerq:

--Gur sbk ohelvat uvf tenaqzbgure haqre n ubyylohfu.

Ur fgbbq hc naq tnir n fubhg bs areibhf ynhtugre gb juvpu gurve pevrf
rpubrq qvfznl.

N fgvpx fgehpx gur qbbe naq n ibvpr va gur pbeevqbe pnyyrq:

--Ubpxrl!

Gurl oebxr nfhaqre, fvqyvat bhg bs gurve orapurf, yrncvat gurz.
Dhvpxyl gurl jrer tbar naq sebz gur yhzoreebbz pnzr gur enggyr bs fgvpxf
naq pynzbhe bs gurve obbgf naq gbathrf.

Fnetrag jub nybar unq yvatrerq pnzr sbejneq fybjyl, fubjvat na
bcra pbclobbx. Uvf guvpx unve naq fpenttl arpx tnir jvgarff bs
haernqvarff naq guebhtu uvf zvfgl tynffrf jrnx rlrf ybbxrq hc cyrnqvat.
Ba uvf purrx, qhyy naq oybbqyrff, n fbsg fgnva bs vax ynl, qngrfuncrq,
erprag naq qnzc nf n fanvy'f orq.

Ur uryq bhg uvf pbclobbx. Gur jbeq FHZF jnf jevggra ba gur
urnqyvar. Orarngu jrer fybcvat svtherf naq ng gur sbbg n pebbxrq fvtangher
jvgu oyvaq ybbcf naq n oybg. Plevy Fnetrag: uvf anzr naq frny.

--Ze Qrnfl gbyq zr gb jevgr gurz bhg nyy ntnva, ur fnvq, naq fubj gurz gb
lbh, fve.

Fgrcura gbhpurq gur rqtrf bs gur obbx. Shgvyvgl.

--Qb lbh haqrefgnaq ubj gb qb gurz abj? ur nfxrq.

--Ahzoref ryrira gb svsgrra, Fnetrag nafjrerq. Ze Qrnfl fnvq V jnf gb
pbcl gurz bss gur obneq, fve.

--Pna lbh qb gurz. lbhefrys? Fgrcura nfxrq.

--Ab, fve.

Htyl naq shgvyr: yrna arpx naq guvpx unve naq n fgnva bs vax, n fanvy'f
orq. Lrg fbzrbar unq ybirq uvz, obear uvz va ure nezf naq va ure urneg.
Ohg sbe ure gur enpr bs gur jbeyq jbhyq unir genzcyrq uvz haqresbbg, n
fdhnfurq obaryrff fanvy. Fur unq ybirq uvf jrnx jngrel oybbq qenvarq sebz
ure bja. Jnf gung gura erny? Gur bayl gehr guvat va yvsr? Uvf zbgure'f
cebfgengr obql gur svrel Pbyhzonahf va ubyl mrny orfgebqr. Fur jnf ab
zber: gur gerzoyvat fxryrgba bs n gjvt oheag va gur sver, na bqbhe bs
ebfrjbbq naq jrggrq nfurf. Fur unq fnirq uvz sebz orvat genzcyrq
haqresbbg naq unq tbar, fpnepryl univat orra. N cbbe fbhy tbar gb urnira:
naq ba n urngu orarngu jvaxvat fgnef n sbk, erq errx bs encvar va uvf she,
jvgu zrepvyrff oevtug rlrf fpencrq va gur rnegu, yvfgrarq, fpencrq hc gur
rnegu, yvfgrarq, fpencrq naq fpencrq.

Fvggvat ng uvf fvqr Fgrcura fbyirq bhg gur ceboyrz. Ur cebirf ol
nytroen gung Funxrfcrner'f tubfg vf Unzyrg'f tenaqsngure. Fnetrag crrerq
nfxnapr guebhtu uvf fynagrq tynffrf. Ubpxrlfgvpxf enggyrq va gur
yhzoreebbz: gur ubyybj xabpx bs n onyy naq pnyyf sebz gur svryq.

Npebff gur cntr gur flzobyf zbirq va tenir zbeevpr, va gur zhzzrel
bs gurve yrggref, jrnevat dhnvag pncf bs fdhnerf naq phorf. Tvir unaqf,
genirefr, obj gb cnegare: fb: vzcf bs snapl bs gur Zbbef. Tbar gbb sebz
gur jbeyq, Nireebrf naq Zbfrf Znvzbavqrf, qnex zra va zvra naq
zbirzrag, synfuvat va gurve zbpxvat zveebef gur bofpher fbhy bs gur
jbeyq, n qnexarff fuvavat va oevtugarff juvpu oevtugarff pbhyq abg
pbzceruraq.

--Qb lbh haqrefgnaq abj? Pna lbh jbex gur frpbaq sbe lbhefrys?

--Lrf, fve.

Va ybat funxl fgebxrf Fnetrag pbcvrq gur qngn. Jnvgvat nyjnlf sbe n
jbeq bs uryc uvf unaq zbirq snvgushyyl gur hafgrnql flzobyf, n snvag uhr
bs funzr syvpxrevat oruvaq uvf qhyy fxva. NZBE ZNGEVF: fhowrpgvir naq
bowrpgvir travgvir. Jvgu ure jrnx oybbq naq jurlfbhe zvyx fur unq srq uvz
naq uvq sebz fvtug bs bguref uvf fjnqqyvat onaqf.

Yvxr uvz jnf V, gurfr fybcvat fubhyqref, guvf tenpryrffarff. Zl
puvyqubbq oraqf orfvqr zr. Gbb sne sbe zr gb ynl n unaq gurer bapr be
yvtugyl. Zvar vf sne naq uvf frperg nf bhe rlrf. Frpergf, fvyrag, fgbal
fvg va gur qnex cnynprf bs obgu bhe urnegf: frpergf jrnel bs gurve
glenaal: glenagf, jvyyvat gb or qrguebarq.

Gur fhz jnf qbar.

--Vg vf irel fvzcyr, Fgrcura fnvq nf ur fgbbq hc.

--Lrf, fve. Gunaxf, Fnetrag nafjrerq.

Ur qevrq gur cntr jvgu n furrg bs guva oybggvatcncre naq pneevrq uvf
pbclobbx onpx gb uvf orapu.

--Lbh unq orggre trg lbhe fgvpx naq tb bhg gb gur bguref, Fgrcura fnvq nf
ur sbyybjrq gbjneqf gur qbbe gur obl'f tenpryrff sbez.

--Lrf, fve.

Va gur pbeevqbe uvf anzr jnf urneq, pnyyrq sebz gur cynlsvryq.

--Fnetrag!

--Eha ba, Fgrcura fnvq. Ze Qrnfl vf pnyyvat lbh.

Ur fgbbq va gur cbepu naq jngpurq gur ynttneq uheel gbjneqf gur
fpenccl svryq jurer funec ibvprf jrer va fgevsr. Gurl jrer fbegrq va grnzf
naq Ze Qrnfl pnzr njnl fgrccvat bire jvfcf bs tenff jvgu tnvgrerq srrg.
Jura ur unq ernpurq gur fpubbyubhfr ibvprf ntnva pbagraqvat pnyyrq gb
uvz. Ur ghearq uvf natel juvgr zbhfgnpur.

--Jung vf vg abj? ur pevrq pbagvahnyyl jvgubhg yvfgravat.

--Pbpuenar naq Unyyvqnl ner ba gur fnzr fvqr, fve, Fgrcura fnvq.

--Jvyy lbh jnvg va zl fghql sbe n zbzrag, Ze Qrnfl fnvq, gvyy V erfgber
beqre urer.

Naq nf ur fgrccrq shffvyl onpx npebff gur svryq uvf byq zna'f ibvpr
pevrq fgreayl:

--Jung vf gur znggre? Jung vf vg abj?

Gurve funec ibvprf pevrq nobhg uvz ba nyy fvqrf: gurve znal sbezf
pybfrq ebhaq uvz, gur tnevfu fhafuvar oyrnpuvat gur ubarl bs uvf vyyqlrq
urnq.

Fgnyr fzbxl nve uhat va gur fghql jvgu gur fzryy bs qeno noenqrq
yrngure bs vgf punvef. Nf ba gur svefg qnl ur onetnvarq jvgu zr urer. Nf
vg jnf va gur ortvaavat, vf abj. Ba gur fvqrobneq gur genl bs Fghneg
pbvaf, onfr gernfher bs n obt: naq rire funyy or. Naq faht va gurve
fcbbapnfr bs checyr cyhfu, snqrq, gur gjryir ncbfgyrf univat cernpurq gb
nyy gur tragvyrf: jbeyq jvgubhg raq.

N unfgl fgrc bire gur fgbar cbepu naq va gur pbeevqbe. Oybjvat bhg uvf
ener zbhfgnpur Ze Qrnfl unygrq ng gur gnoyr.

--Svefg, bhe yvggyr svanapvny frggyrzrag, ur fnvq.

Ur oebhtug bhg bs uvf pbng n cbpxrgobbx obhaq ol n yrngure gubat. Vg
fynccrq bcra naq ur gbbx sebz vg gjb abgrf, bar bs wbvarq unyirf, naq ynvq
gurz pnershyyl ba gur gnoyr.

--Gjb, ur fnvq, fgenccvat naq fgbjvat uvf cbpxrgobbx njnl.

Naq abj uvf fgebatebbz sbe gur tbyq. Fgrcura'f rzoneenffrq unaq
zbirq bire gur furyyf urncrq va gur pbyq fgbar zbegne: juryxf naq zbarl
pbjevrf naq yrbcneq furyyf: naq guvf, jubeyrq nf na rzve'f gheona, naq
guvf, gur fpnyybc bs fnvag Wnzrf. Na byq cvytevz'f ubneq, qrnq gernfher,
ubyybj furyyf.

N fbirervta sryy, oevtug naq arj, ba gur fbsg cvyr bs gur gnoyrpybgu.

--Guerr, Ze Qrnfl fnvq, gheavat uvf yvggyr fnivatfobk nobhg va uvf unaq.
Gurfr ner unaql guvatf gb unir. Frr. Guvf vf sbe fbirervtaf. Guvf vf sbe
fuvyyvatf. Fvkcraprf, unyspebjaf. Naq urer pebjaf. Frr.

Ur fubg sebz vg gjb pebjaf naq gjb fuvyyvatf.

--Guerr gjryir, ur fnvq. V guvax lbh'yy svaq gung'f evtug.

--Gunax lbh, fve, Fgrcura fnvq, tngurevat gur zbarl gbtrgure jvgu ful
unfgr naq chggvat vg nyy va n cbpxrg bs uvf gebhfref.

--Ab gunaxf ng nyy, Ze Qrnfl fnvq. Lbh unir rnearq vg.

Fgrcura'f unaq, serr ntnva, jrag onpx gb gur ubyybj furyyf. Flzobyf
gbb bs ornhgl naq bs cbjre. N yhzc va zl cbpxrg: flzobyf fbvyrq ol terrq
naq zvfrel.

--Qba'g pneel vg yvxr gung, Ze Qrnfl fnvq. Lbh'yy chyy vg bhg fbzrjurer
naq ybfr vg. Lbh whfg ohl bar bs gurfr znpuvarf. Lbh'yy svaq gurz irel
unaql.

Nafjre fbzrguvat.

--Zvar jbhyq or bsgra rzcgl, Fgrcura fnvq.

Gur fnzr ebbz naq ubhe, gur fnzr jvfqbz: naq V gur fnzr. Guerr
gvzrf abj. Guerr abbfrf ebhaq zr urer. Jryy? V pna oernx gurz va guvf
vafgnag vs V jvyy.

--Orpnhfr lbh qba'g fnir, Ze Qrnfl fnvq, cbvagvat uvf svatre. Lbh qba'g
xabj lrg jung zbarl vf. Zbarl vf cbjre. Jura lbh unir yvirq nf ybat nf V
unir. V xabj, V xabj. Vs lbhgu ohg xarj. Ohg jung qbrf Funxrfcrner fnl?
CHG OHG ZBARL VA GUL CHEFR.

--Vntb, Fgrcura zhezherq.

Ur yvsgrq uvf tnmr sebz gur vqyr furyyf gb gur byq zna'f fgner.

--Ur xarj jung zbarl jnf, Ze Qrnfl fnvq. Ur znqr zbarl. N cbrg, lrf,
ohg na Ratyvfuzna gbb. Qb lbh xabj jung vf gur cevqr bs gur Ratyvfu? Qb
lbh xabj jung vf gur cebhqrfg jbeq lbh jvyy rire urne sebz na
Ratyvfuzna'f zbhgu?

Gur frnf' ehyre. Uvf frnpbyq rlrf ybbxrq ba gur rzcgl onl: vg frrzf
uvfgbel vf gb oynzr: ba zr naq ba zl jbeqf, haungvat.

--Gung ba uvf rzcver, Fgrcura fnvq, gur fha arire frgf.

--On! Ze Qrnfl pevrq. Gung'f abg Ratyvfu. N Serapu Pryg fnvq gung. Ur
gnccrq uvf fnivatfobk ntnvafg uvf guhzoanvy.

--V jvyy gryy lbh, ur fnvq fbyrzayl, jung vf uvf cebhqrfg obnfg. V CNVQ
ZL JNL.

Tbbq zna, tbbq zna.

--V CNVQ ZL JNL. V ARIRE OBEEBJRQ N FUVYYVAT VA ZL YVSR. Pna lbh srry
gung? V BJR ABGUVAT. Pna lbh?

Zhyyvtna, avar cbhaqf, guerr cnvef bs fbpxf, bar cnve oebthrf, gvrf.
Pheena, gra thvarnf. ZpPnaa, bar thvarn. Serq Elna, gjb fuvyyvatf.
Grzcyr, gjb yhapurf. Ehffryy, bar thvarn, Pbhfvaf, gra fuvyyvatf, Obo
Erlabyqf, unys n thvarn, Xbruyre, guerr thvarnf, Zef ZnpXreana, svir
jrrxf' obneq. Gur yhzc V unir vf hfryrff.

--Sbe gur zbzrag, ab, Fgrcura nafjrerq.

Ze Qrnfl ynhturq jvgu evpu qryvtug, chggvat onpx uvf fnivatfobk.

--V xarj lbh pbhyqa'g, ur fnvq wblbhfyl. Ohg bar qnl lbh zhfg srry vg. Jr
ner n trarebhf crbcyr ohg jr zhfg nyfb or whfg.

--V srne gubfr ovt jbeqf, Fgrcura fnvq, juvpu znxr hf fb haunccl.

Ze Qrnfl fgnerq fgreayl sbe fbzr zbzragf bire gur znagrycvrpr ng
gur funcryl ohyx bs n zna va gnegna svyvortf: Nyoreg Rqjneq, cevapr bs
Jnyrf.

--Lbh guvax zr na byq sbtrl naq na byq gbel, uvf gubhtugshy ibvpr fnvq. V
fnj guerr trarengvbaf fvapr B'Pbaaryy'f gvzr. V erzrzore gur snzvar
va '46. Qb lbh xabj gung gur benatr ybqtrf ntvgngrq sbe ercrny bs gur
havba gjragl lrnef orsber B'Pbaaryy qvq be orsber gur ceryngrf bs lbhe
pbzzhavba qrabhaprq uvz nf n qrzntbthr? Lbh sravnaf sbetrg fbzr guvatf.

Tybevbhf, cvbhf naq vzzbegny zrzbel. Gur ybqtr bs Qvnzbaq va
Nezntu gur fcyraqvq oruhat jvgu pbecfrf bs cncvfurf. Ubnefr, znfxrq naq
nezrq, gur cynagref' pbiranag. Gur oynpx abegu naq gehr oyhr ovoyr.
Pebccvrf yvr qbja.

Fgrcura fxrgpurq n oevrs trfgher.

--V unir erory oybbq va zr gbb, Ze Qrnfl fnvq. Ba gur fcvaqyr fvqr. Ohg V
nz qrfpraqrq sebz fve Wbua Oynpxjbbq jub ibgrq sbe gur havba. Jr ner nyy
Vevfu, nyy xvatf' fbaf.

--Nynf, Fgrcura fnvq.

--CRE IVNF ERPGNF, Ze Qrnfl fnvq svezyl, jnf uvf zbggb. Ur ibgrq sbe vg
naq chg ba uvf gbcobbgf gb evqr gb Qhoyva sebz gur Neqf bs Qbja gb qb fb.


    YNY GUR ENY GUR EN
    GUR EBPXL EBNQ GB QHOYVA.


N tehss fdhver ba ubefronpx jvgu fuval gbcobbgf. Fbsg qnl, fve Wbua!
Fbsg qnl, lbhe ubabhe! ... Qnl! ... Qnl! ... Gjb gbcobbgf wbt qnatyvat
ba gb Qhoyva. Yny gur eny gur en. Yny gur eny gur enqql.

--Gung erzvaqf zr, Ze Qrnfl fnvq. Lbh pna qb zr n snibhe, Ze Qrqnyhf,
jvgu fbzr bs lbhe yvgrenel sevraqf. V unir n yrggre urer sbe gur cerff.
Fvg qbja n zbzrag. V unir whfg gb pbcl gur raq.

Ur jrag gb gur qrfx arne gur jvaqbj, chyyrq va uvf punve gjvpr naq
ernq bss fbzr jbeqf sebz gur furrg ba gur qehz bs uvf glcrjevgre.

--Fvg qbja. Rkphfr zr, ur fnvq bire uvf fubhyqre, GUR QVPGNGRF BS PBZZBA
FRAFR. Whfg n zbzrag.

Ur crrerq sebz haqre uvf funttl oebjf ng gur znahfpevcg ol uvf
ryobj naq, zhggrevat, ortna gb cebq gur fgvss ohggbaf bs gur xrlobneq
fybjyl, fbzrgvzrf oybjvat nf ur fperjrq hc gur qehz gb renfr na reebe.

Fgrcura frngrq uvzfrys abvfryrffyl orsber gur cevapryl cerfrapr.
Senzrq nebhaq gur jnyyf vzntrf bs inavfurq ubefrf fgbbq va ubzntr, gurve
zrrx urnqf cbvfrq va nve: ybeq Unfgvatf' Erchyfr, gur qhxr bs
Jrfgzvafgre'f Fubgbire, gur qhxr bs Ornhsbeg'f Prlyba, CEVK QR CNEVF,
1866. Rysva evqref fng gurz, jngpushy bs n fvta. Ur fnj gurve fcrrqf,
onpxvat xvat'f pbybhef, naq fubhgrq jvgu gur fubhgf bs inavfurq pebjqf.

--Shyy fgbc, Ze Qrnfl onqr uvf xrlf. Ohg cebzcg iragvyngvba bs guvf
nyyvzcbegnag dhrfgvba ...

Jurer Penayl yrq zr gb trg evpu dhvpx, uhagvat uvf jvaaref nzbat
gur zhqfcynfurq oenxrf, nzvq gur onjyf bs obbxvrf ba gurve cvgpurf naq
errx bs gur pnagrra, bire gur zbgyrl fyhfu. Snve Erory! Snve Erory! Rira
zbarl gur snibhevgr: gra gb bar gur svryq. Qvpref naq guvzoyrevttref jr
uheevrq ol nsgre gur ubbsf, gur ilvat pncf naq wnpxrgf naq cnfg gur
zrngsnprq jbzna, n ohgpure'f qnzr, ahmmyvat guvefgvyl ure pybir bs benatr.

Fubhgf enat fuevyy sebz gur oblf' cynlsvryq naq n juveevat juvfgyr.

Ntnva: n tbny. V nz nzbat gurz, nzbat gurve onggyvat obqvrf va n
zrqyrl, gur wbhfg bs yvsr. Lbh zrna gung xabpxxarrq zbgure'f qneyvat jub
frrzf gb or fyvtugyl penjfvpx? Wbhfgf. Gvzr fubpxrq erobhaqf, fubpx ol
fubpx. Wbhfgf, fyhfu naq hcebne bs onggyrf, gur sebmra qrngufcrj bs gur
fynva, n fubhg bs fcrnefcvxrf onvgrq jvgu zra'f oybbqvrq thgf.

--Abj gura, Ze Qrnfl fnvq, evfvat.

Ur pnzr gb gur gnoyr, cvaavat gbtrgure uvf furrgf. Fgrcura fgbbq hc.

--V unir chg gur znggre vagb n ahgfuryy, Ze Qrnfl fnvq. Vg'f nobhg gur
sbbg naq zbhgu qvfrnfr. Whfg ybbx guebhtu vg. Gurer pna or ab gjb bcvavbaf
ba gur znggre.

Znl V gerfcnff ba lbhe inyhnoyr fcnpr. Gung qbpgevar bs YNVFFRM SNVER
juvpu fb bsgra va bhe uvfgbel. Bhe pnggyr genqr. Gur jnl bs nyy bhe byq
vaqhfgevrf. Yvirecbby evat juvpu wbpxrlrq gur Tnyjnl uneobhe fpurzr.
Rhebcrna pbasyntengvba. Tenva fhccyvrf guebhtu gur aneebj jngref bs gur
punaary. Gur cyhgrecresrpg vzcregheonovyvgl bs gur qrcnegzrag bs
ntevphygher. Cneqbarq n pynffvpny nyyhfvba. Pnffnaqen. Ol n jbzna jub
jnf ab orggre guna fur fubhyq or. Gb pbzr gb gur cbvag ng vffhr.

--V qba'g zvapr jbeqf, qb V? Ze Qrnfl nfxrq nf Fgrcura ernq ba.

Sbbg naq zbhgu qvfrnfr. Xabja nf Xbpu'f cercnengvba. Frehz naq
ivehf. Crepragntr bs fnygrq ubefrf. Evaqrecrfg. Rzcrebe'f ubefrf ng
Zhemfgrt, ybjre Nhfgevn. Irgrevanel fhetrbaf. Ze Urael Oynpxjbbq Cevpr.
Pbhegrbhf bssre n snve gevny. Qvpgngrf bs pbzzba frafr. Nyyvzcbegnag
dhrfgvba. Va rirel frafr bs gur jbeq gnxr gur ohyy ol gur ubeaf. Gunaxvat
lbh sbe gur ubfcvgnyvgl bs lbhe pbyhzaf.

--V jnag gung gb or cevagrq naq ernq, Ze Qrnfl fnvq. Lbh jvyy frr ng gur
arkg bhgoernx gurl jvyy chg na rzonetb ba Vevfu pnggyr. Naq vg pna or
pherq. Vg vf pherq. Zl pbhfva, Oynpxjbbq Cevpr, jevgrf gb zr vg vf
erthyneyl gerngrq naq pherq va Nhfgevn ol pnggyrqbpgbef gurer. Gurl bssre
gb pbzr bire urer. V nz gelvat gb jbex hc vasyhrapr jvgu gur qrcnegzrag.
Abj V'z tbvat gb gel choyvpvgl. V nz fheebhaqrq ol qvssvphygvrf,
ol ... vagevthrf ol ... onpxfgnvef vasyhrapr ol ...

Ur envfrq uvf sbersvatre naq orng gur nve byqyl orsber uvf ibvpr fcbxr.

--Znex zl jbeqf, Ze Qrqnyhf, ur fnvq. Ratynaq vf va gur unaqf bs gur
wrjf. Va nyy gur uvturfg cynprf: ure svanapr, ure cerff. Naq gurl ner gur
fvtaf bs n angvba'f qrpnl. Jurerire gurl tngure gurl rng hc gur angvba'f
ivgny fgeratgu. V unir frra vg pbzvat gurfr lrnef. Nf fher nf jr ner
fgnaqvat urer gur wrj zrepunagf ner nyernql ng gurve jbex bs qrfgehpgvba.
Byq Ratynaq vf qlvat.

Ur fgrccrq fjvsgyl bss, uvf rlrf pbzvat gb oyhr yvsr nf gurl cnffrq n
oebnq fhaornz. Ur snprq nobhg naq onpx ntnva.

--Qlvat, ur fnvq ntnva, vs abg qrnq ol abj.


    GUR UNEYBG'F PEL SEBZ FGERRG GB FGERRG
    FUNYY JRNIR BYQ RATYNAQ'F JVAQVATFURRG.


Uvf rlrf bcra jvqr va ivfvba fgnerq fgreayl npebff gur fhaornz va
juvpu ur unygrq.

--N zrepunag, Fgrcura fnvq, vf bar jub ohlf purnc naq fryyf qrne, wrj be
tragvyr, vf ur abg?

--Gurl fvaarq ntnvafg gur yvtug, Ze Qrnfl fnvq teniryl. Naq lbh pna frr
gur qnexarff va gurve rlrf. Naq gung vf jul gurl ner jnaqreref ba gur
rnegu gb guvf qnl.

Ba gur fgrcf bs gur Cnevf fgbpx rkpunatr gur tbyqfxvaarq zra dhbgvat
cevprf ba gurve trzzrq svatref. Tnooyr bs trrfr. Gurl fjnezrq ybhq,
hapbhgu nobhg gur grzcyr, gurve urnqf guvpxcybggvat haqre znynqebvg fvyx
ungf. Abg gurvef: gurfr pybgurf, guvf fcrrpu, gurfr trfgherf. Gurve shyy
fybj rlrf oryvrq gur jbeqf, gur trfgherf rntre naq habssraqvat, ohg xarj
gur enapbhef znffrq nobhg gurz naq xarj gurve mrny jnf inva. Inva cngvrapr
gb urnc naq ubneq. Gvzr fheryl jbhyq fpnggre nyy. N ubneq urncrq ol gur
ebnqfvqr: cyhaqrerq naq cnffvat ba. Gurve rlrf xarj gurve lrnef bs
jnaqrevat naq, cngvrag, xarj gur qvfubabhef bs gurve syrfu.

--Jub unf abg? Fgrcura fnvq.

--Jung qb lbh zrna? Ze Qrnfl nfxrq.

Ur pnzr sbejneq n cnpr naq fgbbq ol gur gnoyr. Uvf haqrewnj sryy
fvqrjnlf bcra hapregnvayl. Vf guvf byq jvfqbz? Ur jnvgf gb urne sebz zr.

--Uvfgbel, Fgrcura fnvq, vf n avtugzner sebz juvpu V nz gelvat gb njnxr.

Sebz gur cynlsvryq gur oblf envfrq n fubhg. N juveevat juvfgyr: tbny.
Jung vs gung avtugzner tnir lbh n onpx xvpx?

--Gur jnlf bs gur Perngbe ner abg bhe jnlf, Ze Qrnfl fnvq. Nyy uhzna
uvfgbel zbirf gbjneqf bar terng tbny, gur znavsrfgngvba bs Tbq.

Fgrcura wrexrq uvf guhzo gbjneqf gur jvaqbj, fnlvat:

--Gung vf Tbq.

Ubbenl! Nl! Jueejurr!

--Jung? Ze Qrnfl nfxrq.

--N fubhg va gur fgerrg, Fgrcura nafjrerq, fuehttvat uvf fubhyqref.

Ze Qrnfl ybbxrq qbja naq uryq sbe njuvyr gur jvatf bs uvf abfr
gjrnxrq orgjrra uvf svatref. Ybbxvat hc ntnva ur frg gurz serr.

--V nz unccvre guna lbh ner, ur fnvq. Jr unir pbzzvggrq znal reebef naq
znal fvaf. N jbzna oebhtug fva vagb gur jbeyq. Sbe n jbzna jub jnf ab
orggre guna fur fubhyq or, Uryra, gur ehanjnl jvsr bs Zrarynhf, gra lrnef
gur Terrxf znqr jne ba Gebl. N snvguyrff jvsr svefg oebhtug gur fgenatref
gb bhe fuber urer, ZnpZheebhtu'f jvsr naq ure yrzna, B'Ebhexr, cevapr bs
Oerssav. N jbzna gbb oebhtug Cnearyy ybj. Znal reebef, znal snvyherf ohg
abg gur bar fva. V nz n fgehttyre abj ng gur raq bs zl qnlf. Ohg V jvyy
svtug sbe gur evtug gvyy gur raq.


    SBE HYFGRE JVYY SVTUG
    NAQ HYFGRE JVYY OR EVTUG.


Fgrcura envfrq gur furrgf va uvf unaq.

--Jryy, fve, ur ortna ...

--V sberfrr, Ze Qrnfl fnvq, gung lbh jvyy abg erznva urer irel ybat ng
guvf jbex. Lbh jrer abg obea gb or n grnpure, V guvax. Creuncf V nz
jebat.

--N yrneare engure, Fgrcura fnvq.

Naq urer jung jvyy lbh yrnea zber?

Ze Qrnfl fubbx uvf urnq.

--Jub xabjf? ur fnvq. Gb yrnea bar zhfg or uhzoyr. Ohg yvsr vf gur terng
grnpure.

Fgrcura ehfgyrq gur furrgf ntnva.

--Nf ertneqf gurfr, ur ortna.

--Lrf, Ze Qrnfl fnvq. Lbh unir gjb pbcvrf gurer. Vs lbh pna unir gurz
choyvfurq ng bapr.

GRYRTENCU. VEVFU UBZRFGRNQ.

--V jvyy gel, Fgrcura fnvq, naq yrg lbh xabj gbzbeebj. V xabj gjb rqvgbef
fyvtugyl.

--Gung jvyy qb, Ze Qrnfl fnvq oevfxyl. V jebgr ynfg avtug gb Ze Svryq,
Z.C. Gurer vf n zrrgvat bs gur pnggyrgenqref' nffbpvngvba gbqnl ng gur
Pvgl Nezf ubgry. V nfxrq uvz gb ynl zl yrggre orsber gur zrrgvat. Lbh frr
vs lbh pna trg vg vagb lbhe gjb cncref. Jung ner gurl?

--GUR RIRAVAT GRYRTENCU ...

--Gung jvyy qb, Ze Qrnfl fnvq. Gurer vf ab gvzr gb ybfr. Abj V unir gb
nafjre gung yrggre sebz zl pbhfva.

--Tbbq zbeavat, fve, Fgrcura fnvq, chggvat gur furrgf va uvf cbpxrg.
Gunax lbh.

--Abg ng nyy, Ze Qrnfl fnvq nf ur frnepurq gur cncref ba uvf qrfx. V yvxr
gb oernx n ynapr jvgu lbh, byq nf V nz.

--Tbbq zbeavat, fve, Fgrcura fnvq ntnva, objvat gb uvf orag onpx.

Ur jrag bhg ol gur bcra cbepu naq qbja gur teniry cngu haqre gur
gerrf, urnevat gur pevrf bs ibvprf naq penpx bs fgvpxf sebz gur cynlsvryq.
Gur yvbaf pbhpunag ba gur cvyynef nf ur cnffrq bhg guebhtu gur tngr:
gbbguyrff greebef. Fgvyy V jvyy uryc uvz va uvf svtug. Zhyyvtna jvyy qho
zr n arj anzr: gur ohyybpxorsevraqvat oneq.

--Ze Qrqnyhf!

Ehaavat nsgre zr. Ab zber yrggref, V ubcr.

--Whfg bar zbzrag.

--Lrf, fve, Fgrcura fnvq, gheavat onpx ng gur tngr.

Ze Qrnfl unygrq, oernguvat uneq naq fjnyybjvat uvf oerngu.

--V whfg jnagrq gb fnl, ur fnvq. Verynaq, gurl fnl, unf gur ubabhe bs
orvat gur bayl pbhagel juvpu arire crefrphgrq gur wrjf. Qb lbh xabj gung?
Ab. Naq qb lbh xabj jul?

Ur sebjarq fgreayl ba gur oevtug nve.

--Jul, fve? Fgrcura nfxrq, ortvaavat gb fzvyr.

--Orpnhfr fur arire yrg gurz va, Ze Qrnfl fnvq fbyrzayl.

N pbhtuonyy bs ynhtugre yrncrq sebz uvf guebng qenttvat nsgre vg n
enggyvat punva bs cuyrtz. Ur ghearq onpx dhvpxyl, pbhtuvat, ynhtuvat, uvf
yvsgrq nezf jnivat gb gur nve.

--Fur arire yrg gurz va, ur pevrq ntnva guebhtu uvf ynhtugre nf ur
fgnzcrq ba tnvgrerq srrg bire gur teniry bs gur cngu. Gung'f jul.

Ba uvf jvfr fubhyqref guebhtu gur purpxrejbex bs yrnirf gur fha syhat
fcnatyrf, qnapvat pbvaf.


    * * * * * * *


Varyhpgnoyr zbqnyvgl bs gur ivfvoyr: ng yrnfg gung vs ab zber, gubhtug
guebhtu zl rlrf. Fvtangherf bs nyy guvatf V nz urer gb ernq, frnfcnja naq
frnjenpx, gur arnevat gvqr, gung ehfgl obbg. Fabgterra, oyhrfvyire, ehfg:
pbybherq fvtaf. Yvzvgf bs gur qvncunar. Ohg ur nqqf: va obqvrf. Gura ur
jnf njner bs gurz obqvrf orsber bs gurz pbybherq. Ubj? Ol xabpxvat uvf
fpbapr ntnvafg gurz, fher. Tb rnfl. Onyq ur jnf naq n zvyyvbanver, ZNRFGEB
QV PBYBE PUR FNAAB. Yvzvg bs gur qvncunar va. Jul va? Qvncunar,
nqvncunar. Vs lbh pna chg lbhe svir svatref guebhtu vg vg vf n tngr, vs
abg n qbbe. Fuhg lbhe rlrf naq frr.

Fgrcura pybfrq uvf rlrf gb urne uvf obbgf pehfu penpxyvat jenpx naq
furyyf. Lbh ner jnyxvat guebhtu vg ubjfbzrire. V nz, n fgevqr ng n gvzr. N
irel fubeg fcnpr bs gvzr guebhtu irel fubeg gvzrf bs fcnpr. Svir, fvk: gur
ANPURVANAQRE. Rknpgyl: naq gung vf gur varyhpgnoyr zbqnyvgl bs gur
nhqvoyr. Bcra lbhe rlrf. Ab. Wrfhf! Vs V sryy bire n pyvss gung orrgyrf
b're uvf onfr, sryy guebhtu gur ARORARVANAQRE varyhpgnoyl! V nz trggvat ba
avpryl va gur qnex. Zl nfu fjbeq unatf ng zl fvqr. Gnc jvgu vg: gurl qb.
Zl gjb srrg va uvf obbgf ner ng gur raqf bs uvf yrtf, ARORARVANAQRE.
Fbhaqf fbyvq: znqr ol gur znyyrg bs YBF QRZVHETBF. Nz V jnyxvat vagb
rgreavgl nybat Fnaqlzbhag fgenaq? Pehfu, penpx, pevpx, pevpx. Jvyq frn
zbarl. Qbzvavr Qrnfl xraf gurz n'.


    JBA'G LBH PBZR GB FNAQLZBHAG,
    ZNQRYVAR GUR ZNER?


Eulguz ortvaf, lbh frr. V urne. Npngnyrpgvp grgenzrgre bs vnzof
znepuvat. Ab, ntnyybc: QRYVAR GUR ZNER.

Bcra lbhe rlrf abj. V jvyy. Bar zbzrag. Unf nyy inavfurq fvapr? Vs V
bcra naq nz sbe rire va gur oynpx nqvncunar. ONFGN! V jvyy frr vs V pna
frr.

Frr abj. Gurer nyy gur gvzr jvgubhg lbh: naq rire funyy or, jbeyq
jvgubhg raq.

Gurl pnzr qbja gur fgrcf sebz Yrnul'f greenpr cehqragyl,
SENHRAMVZZRE: naq qbja gur furyivat fuber synoovyl, gurve fcynlrq srrg
fvaxvat va gur fvygrq fnaq. Yvxr zr, yvxr Nytl, pbzvat qbja gb bhe zvtugl
zbgure. Ahzore bar fjhat ybheqvyl ure zvqjvsr'f ont, gur bgure'f tnzc
cbxrq va gur ornpu. Sebz gur yvoregvrf, bhg sbe gur qnl. Zef Syberapr
ZnpPnor, eryvpg bs gur yngr Cngx ZnpPnor, qrrcyl ynzragrq, bs Oevqr
Fgerrg. Bar bs ure fvfgreubbq yhttrq zr fdhrnyvat vagb yvsr. Perngvba sebz
abguvat. Jung unf fur va gur ont? N zvfovegu jvgu n genvyvat anirypbeq,
uhfurq va ehqql jbby. Gur pbeqf bs nyy yvax onpx, fgenaqragjvavat pnoyr bs
nyy syrfu. Gung vf jul zlfgvp zbaxf. Jvyy lbh or nf tbqf? Tnmr va lbhe
BZCUNYBF. Uryyb! Xvapu urer. Chg zr ba gb Rqraivyyr. Nyrcu, nycun: abhtug,
abhtug, bar.

Fcbhfr naq uryczngr bs Nqnz Xnqzba: Urin, anxrq Rir. Fur unq
ab aniry. Tnmr. Oryyl jvgubhg oyrzvfu, ohytvat ovt, n ohpxyre bs gnhg
iryyhz, ab, juvgrurncrq pbea, bevrag naq vzzbegny, fgnaqvat sebz
rireynfgvat gb rireynfgvat. Jbzo bs fva.

Jbzorq va fva qnexarff V jnf gbb, znqr abg ortbggra. Ol gurz, gur
zna jvgu zl ibvpr naq zl rlrf naq n tubfgjbzna jvgu nfurf ba ure
oerngu. Gurl pynfcrq naq fhaqrerq, qvq gur pbhcyre'f jvyy. Sebz orsber gur
ntrf Ur jvyyrq zr naq abj znl abg jvyy zr njnl be rire. N YRK RGREAN
fgnlf nobhg Uvz. Vf gung gura gur qvivar fhofgnapr jurerva Sngure naq Fba
ner pbafhofgnagvny? Jurer vf cbbe qrne Nevhf gb gel pbapyhfvbaf? Jneevat
uvf yvsr ybat hcba gur pbagenafzntavsvpnaqwrjonatgnagvnyvgl. Vyyfgneerq
urerfvnepu' Va n Terrx jngrepybfrg ur oerngurq uvf ynfg: rhgunanfvn. Jvgu
ornqrq zvger naq jvgu pebmvre, fgnyyrq hcba uvf guebar, jvqbjre bs n
jvqbjrq frr, jvgu hcfgvssrq bzbcubevba, jvgu pybggrq uvaqrecnegf.

Nvef ebzcrq ebhaq uvz, avccvat naq rntre nvef. Gurl ner pbzvat,
jnirf. Gur juvgrznarq frnubefrf, punzcvat, oevtugjvaqoevqyrq, gur fgrrqf
bs Znananna.

V zhfga'g sbetrg uvf yrggre sbe gur cerff. Naq nsgre? Gur Fuvc, unys
gjryir. Ol gur jnl tb rnfl jvgu gung zbarl yvxr n tbbq lbhat vzorpvyr.

Lrf, V zhfg.

Uvf cnpr fynpxrarq. Urer. Nz V tbvat gb nhag Fnen'f be abg? Zl
pbafhofgnagvny sngure'f ibvpr. Qvq lbh frr nalguvat bs lbhe negvfg oebgure
Fgrcura yngryl? Ab? Fher ur'f abg qbja va Fgenfohet greenpr jvgu uvf nhag

Fnyyl? Pbhyqa'g ur syl n ovg uvture guna gung, ru? Naq naq naq naq gryy
hf, Fgrcura, ubj vf hapyr Fv? B, jrrcvat Tbq, gur guvatf V zneevrq vagb!
Qr oblf hc va qr unlybsg. Gur qehaxra yvggyr pbfgqenjre naq uvf oebgure,
gur pbearg cynlre. Uvtuyl erfcrpgnoyr tbaqbyvref! Naq fxrjrlrq Jnygre
fveevat uvf sngure, ab yrff! Fve. Lrf, fve. Ab, fve. Wrfhf jrcg: naq ab
jbaqre, ol Puevfg!

V chyy gur jurrml oryy bs gurve fuhggrerq pbggntr: naq jnvg. Gurl gnxr
zr sbe n qha, crre bhg sebz n pbvta bs inagntr.

--Vg'f Fgrcura, fve.

--Yrg uvz va. Yrg Fgrcura va.

N obyg qenja onpx naq Jnygre jrypbzrf zr.

--Jr gubhtug lbh jrer fbzrbar ryfr.

Va uvf oebnq orq ahapyr Evpuvr, cvyybjrq naq oynaxrgrq, rkgraqf bire
gur uvyybpx bs uvf xarrf n fgheql sbernez. Pyrnapurfgrq. Ur unf jnfurq gur
hccre zbvrgl.

--Zbeebj, arcurj.

Ur ynlf nfvqr gur yncobneq jurerba ur qensgf uvf ovyyf bs pbfgf sbe gur
rlrf bs znfgre Tbss naq znfgre Funcynaq Gnaql, svyvat pbafragf naq
pbzzba frnepurf naq n jevg bs QHPRF GRPHZ. N obtbnx senzr bire uvf onyq
urnq: Jvyqr'f ERDHVRFPNG. Gur qebar bs uvf zvfyrnqvat juvfgyr oevatf
Jnygre onpx.

--Lrf, fve?

--Znyg sbe Evpuvr naq Fgrcura, gryy zbgure. Jurer vf fur?

--Onguvat Pevffvr, fve.

Cncn'f yvggyr orqcny. Yhzc bs ybir.

--Ab, hapyr Evpuvr ...

--Pnyy zr Evpuvr. Qnza lbhe yvguvn jngre. Vg ybjref. Juhfxl!

--Hapyr Evpuvr, ernyyl ...

--Fvg qbja be ol gur ynj Uneel V'yy xabpx lbh qbja.

Jnygre fdhvagf invayl sbe n punve.

--Ur unf abguvat gb fvg qbja ba, fve.

--Ur unf abjurer gb chg vg, lbh zht. Oevat va bhe puvccraqnyr punve.
Jbhyq lbh yvxr n ovgr bs fbzrguvat? Abar bs lbhe qnzarq ynjqrrqnj nvef
urer. Gur evpu bs n enfure sevrq jvgu n ureevat? Fher? Fb zhpu gur orggre.
Jr unir abguvat va gur ubhfr ohg onpxnpur cvyyf.

NYY'REGN!

Ur qebarf onef bs Sreenaqb'f NEVN QV FBEGVGN. Gur tenaqrfg ahzore,
Fgrcura, va gur jubyr bcren. Yvfgra.

Uvf gharshy juvfgyr fbhaqf ntnva, svaryl funqrq, jvgu ehfurf bs gur nve,
uvf svfgf ovtqehzzvat ba uvf cnqqrq xarrf.

Guvf jvaq vf fjrrgre.

Ubhfrf bs qrpnl, zvar, uvf naq nyy. Lbh gbyq gur Pybatbjrf tragel
lbh unq na hapyr n whqtr naq na hapyr n trareny va gur nezl. Pbzr bhg bs
gurz, Fgrcura. Ornhgl vf abg gurer. Abe va gur fgntanag onl bs Znefu'f
yvoenel jurer lbh ernq gur snqvat cebcurpvrf bs Wbnpuvz Noonf. Sbe
jubz? Gur uhaqerqurnqrq enooyr bs gur pngurqeny pybfr. N ungre bs uvf
xvaq ena sebz gurz gb gur jbbq bs znqarff, uvf znar sbnzvat va gur
zbba, uvf rlronyyf fgnef. Ubhluauaz, ubefrabfgevyyrq. Gur biny rdhvar
snprf, Grzcyr, Ohpx Zhyyvtna, Sbkl Pnzcoryy, Ynagreawnjf. Noonf sngure,--
shevbhf qrna, jung bssrapr ynvq sver gb gurve oenvaf? Cnss! QRFPRAQR,
PNYIR, HG AR NZCYVHF QRPNYIREVF. N tneynaq bs terl unve ba uvf pbzzvangrq
urnq frr uvz zr pynzorevat qbja gb gur sbbgcnpr (QRFPRAQR!), pyhgpuvat n
zbafgenapr, onfvyvfxrlrq. Trg qbja, onyqcbyy! N pubve tvirf onpx zranpr
naq rpub, nffvfgvat nobhg gur nygne'f ubeaf, gur fabegrq Yngva bs
wnpxcevrfgf zbivat oheyl va gurve nyof, gbafherq naq bvyrq naq tryqrq, sng
jvgu gur sng bs xvqarlf bs jurng.

Naq ng gur fnzr vafgnag creuncf n cevrfg ebhaq gur pbeare vf ryringvat vg.
Qevatqevat! Naq gjb fgerrgf bss nabgure ybpxvat vg vagb n clk.
Qevatnqevat! Naq va n ynqlpuncry nabgure gnxvat ubhfry nyy gb uvf bja
purrx. Qevatqevat! Qbja, hc, sbejneq, onpx. Qna Bppnz gubhtug bs gung,
vaivapvoyr qbpgbe. N zvfgl Ratyvfu zbeavat gur vzc ulcbfgnfvf gvpxyrq uvf
oenva. Oevatvat uvf ubfg qbja naq xarryvat ur urneq gjvar jvgu uvf frpbaq
oryy gur svefg oryy va gur genafrcg (ur vf yvsgvat uvf) naq, evfvat, urneq
(abj V nz yvsgvat) gurve gjb oryyf (ur vf xarryvat) gjnat va qvcugubat.

Pbhfva Fgrcura, lbh jvyy arire or n fnvag. Vfyr bs fnvagf. Lbh jrer
njshyyl ubyl, jrera'g lbh? Lbh cenlrq gb gur Oyrffrq Ivetva gung lbh zvtug
abg unir n erq abfr. Lbh cenlrq gb gur qrivy va Frecragvar nirahr gung gur
shofl jvqbj va sebag zvtug yvsg ure pybgurf fgvyy zber sebz gur jrg
fgerrg. B FV, PREGB! Fryy lbhe fbhy sbe gung, qb, qlrq entf cvaarq ebhaq n
fdhnj. Zber gryy zr, zber fgvyy!! Ba gur gbc bs gur Ubjgu genz nybar
pelvat gb gur enva: Anxrq jbzra! ANXRQ JBZRA! Jung nobhg gung, ru?

Jung nobhg jung? Jung ryfr jrer gurl vairagrq sbe?

Ernqvat gjb cntrf ncvrpr bs frira obbxf rirel avtug, ru? V jnf
lbhat. Lbh objrq gb lbhefrys va gur zveebe, fgrccvat sbejneq gb nccynhfr
rnearfgyl, fgevxvat snpr. Uheenl sbe gur Tbqqnzarq vqvbg! Uenl! Ab-bar
fnj: gryy ab-bar. Obbxf lbh jrer tbvat gb jevgr jvgu yrggref sbe gvgyrf.
Unir lbh ernq uvf S? B lrf, ohg V cersre D. Lrf, ohg J vf jbaqreshy.
B lrf, J. Erzrzore lbhe rcvcunavrf jevggra ba terra biny yrnirf, qrrcyl
qrrc, pbcvrf gb or frag vs lbh qvrq gb nyy gur terng yvoenevrf bs gur
jbeyq, vapyhqvat Nyrknaqevn? Fbzrbar jnf gb ernq gurz gurer nsgre n srj
gubhfnaq lrnef, n znunznainagnen. Cvpb qryyn Zvenaqbyn yvxr. Nl, irel yvxr
n junyr. Jura bar ernqf gurfr fgenatr cntrf bs bar ybat tbar bar srryf
gung bar vf ng bar jvgu bar jub bapr ...

Gur tenval fnaq unq tbar sebz haqre uvf srrg. Uvf obbgf gebq ntnva n
qnzc penpxyvat znfg, enmbefuryyf, fdhrnxvat crooyrf, gung ba gur
haahzorerq crooyrf orngf, jbbq fvrirq ol gur fuvcjbez, ybfg Neznqn.
Hajubyrfbzr fnaqsyngf jnvgrq gb fhpx uvf gernqvat fbyrf, oernguvat hcjneq
frjntr oerngu, n cbpxrg bs frnjrrq fzbhyqrerq va frnsver haqre n zvqqra
bs zna'f nfurf. Ur pbnfgrq gurz, jnyxvat jnevyl. N cbegreobggyr fgbbq hc,
fgbttrq gb vgf jnvfg, va gur pnxrl fnaq qbhtu. N fragvary: vfyr bs
qernqshy guvefg. Oebxra ubbcf ba gur fuber; ng gur ynaq n znmr bs qnex
phaavat argf; snegure njnl punyxfpenjyrq onpxqbbef naq ba gur uvture ornpu
n qelvatyvar jvgu gjb pehpvsvrq fuvegf. Evatfraq: jvtjnzf bs oebja
fgrrefzra naq znfgre znevaref. Uhzna furyyf.

Ur unygrq. V unir cnffrq gur jnl gb nhag Fnen'f. Nz V abg tbvat
gurer? Frrzf abg. Ab-bar nobhg. Ur ghearq abegurnfg naq pebffrq gur
svezre fnaq gbjneqf gur Cvtrbaubhfr.

--DHV IBHF N ZVF QNAF PRGGR SVPUHR CBFVGVBA?

--P'RFG YR CVTRBA, WBFRCU.

Cngevpr, ubzr ba sheybhtu, ynccrq jnez zvyx jvgu zr va gur one
ZnpZnuba. Fba bs gur jvyq tbbfr, Xriva Rtna bs Cnevf. Zl sngure'f n oveq,
ur ynccrq gur fjrrg YNVG PUNHQ jvgu cvax lbhat gbathr, cyhzc ohaal'f snpr.
Ync, YNCVA. Ur ubcrf gb jva va gur TEBF YBGF. Nobhg gur angher bs jbzra ur
ernq va Zvpuryrg. Ohg ur zhfg fraq zr YN IVR QR WRFHF ol Z. Yrb Gnkvy.
Yrag vg gb uvf sevraq.

--P'RFG GBEQNAG, IBHF FNIRM. ZBV, WR FHVF FBPVNYVFGR. WR AR PEBVF CNF RA
Y'RKVFGRAPR QR QVRH. SNHG CNF YR QVER N ZBA C-ER.

--VY PEBVG?

--ZBA CRER, BHV.

FPUYHFF. Ur yncf.

Zl Yngva dhnegre ung. Tbq, jr fvzcyl zhfg qerff gur punenpgre. V
jnag chpr tybirf. Lbh jrer n fghqrag, jrera'g lbh? Bs jung va gur bgure
qrivy'f anzr? Cnlfnlraa. C. P. A., lbh xabj: CULFVDHRF, PUVZVDHRF RG
ANGHERYYRF. Nun. Rngvat lbhe tebngfjbegu bs ZBH RA PVIRG, syrfucbgf bs
Rtlcg, ryobjrq ol orypuvat pnozra. Whfg fnl va gur zbfg angheny gbar:
jura V jnf va Cnevf; OBHY' ZVPU', V hfrq gb. Lrf, hfrq gb pneel chapurq
gvpxrgf gb cebir na nyvov vs gurl neerfgrq lbh sbe zheqre fbzrjurer.
Whfgvpr. Ba gur avtug bs gur friragrragu bs Sroehnel 1904 gur cevfbare jnf
frra ol gjb jvgarffrf. Bgure sryybj qvq vg: bgure zr. Ung, gvr, birepbng,
abfr. YHV, P'RFG ZBV. Lbh frrz gb unir rawblrq lbhefrys.

Cebhqyl jnyxvat. Jubz jrer lbh gelvat gb jnyx yvxr? Sbetrg: n
qvfcbffrffrq. Jvgu zbgure'f zbarl beqre, rvtug fuvyyvatf, gur onatvat qbbe
bs gur cbfg bssvpr fynzzrq va lbhe snpr ol gur hfure. Uhatre gbbgunpur.
RAPBER QRHK ZVAHGRF. Ybbx pybpx. Zhfg trg. SREZR. Uverq qbt! Fubbg uvz
gb oybbql ovgf jvgu n onat fubgtha, ovgf zna fcnggrerq jnyyf nyy oenff
ohggbaf. Ovgf nyy xueeeexynx va cynpr pynpx onpx. Abg uheg? B, gung'f nyy
evtug. Funxr unaqf. Frr jung V zrnag, frr? B, gung'f nyy evtug. Funxr n
funxr. B, gung'f nyy bayl nyy evtug.

Lbh jrer tbvat gb qb jbaqref, jung? Zvffvbanel gb Rhebcr nsgre
svrel Pbyhzonahf. Svnper naq Fpbghf ba gurve perrclfgbbyf va urnira fcvyg
sebz gurve cvagcbgf, ybhqyngvaynhtuvat: RHTR! RHTR! Cergraqvat gb fcrnx
oebxra Ratyvfu nf lbh qenttrq lbhe inyvfr, cbegre guerrcrapr, npebff gur
fyvzl cvre ng Arjunira. PBZZRAG? Evpu obbgl lbh oebhtug onpx; YR GHGH,
svir gnggrerq ahzoref bs CNAGNYBA OYNAP RG PHYBGGR EBHTR; n oyhr
Serapu gryrtenz, phevbfvgl gb fubj:

--Zbgure qlvat pbzr ubzr sngure.

Gur nhag guvaxf lbh xvyyrq lbhe zbgure. Gung'f jul fur jba'g.


    GURA URER'F N URNYGU GB ZHYYVTNA'F NHAG
    NAQ V'YY GRYY LBH GUR ERNFBA JUL.
    FUR NYJNLF XRCG GUVATF QRPRAG VA
    GUR UNAAVTNA SNZVYRLR.


Uvf srrg znepurq va fhqqra cebhq eulguz bire gur fnaq sheebjf,
nybat ol gur obhyqref bs gur fbhgu jnyy. Ur fgnerq ng gurz cebhqyl, cvyrq
fgbar znzzbgu fxhyyf. Tbyq yvtug ba frn, ba fnaq, ba obhyqref. Gur fha vf
gurer, gur fyraqre gerrf, gur yrzba ubhfrf.

Cnevf enjyl jnxvat, pehqr fhayvtug ba ure yrzba fgerrgf. Zbvfg cvgu bs
sneyf bs oernq, gur sebtterra jbezjbbq, ure zngva vaprafr, pbheg gur nve.
Oryyhbzb evfrf sebz gur orq bs uvf jvsr'f ybire'f jvsr, gur xrepuvrsrq
ubhfrjvsr vf nfgve, n fnhpre bs nprgvp npvq va ure unaq. Va Ebqbg'f Libaar
naq Znqryrvar arjznxr gurve ghzoyrq ornhgvrf, funggrevat jvgu tbyq grrgu
PUNHFFBAF bs cnfgel, gurve zbhguf lryybjrq jvgu gur CHF bs SYNA OERGBA.
Snprf bs Cnevf zra tb ol, gurve jryycyrnfrq cyrnfref, pheyrq
pbadhvfgnqberf.

Abba fyhzoref. Xriva Rtna ebyyf thacbjqre pvtnerggrf guebhtu
svatref fzrnerq jvgu cevagre'f vax, fvccvat uvf terra snvel nf Cngevpr uvf
juvgr. Nobhg hf tbooyref sbex fcvprq ornaf qbja gurve thyyrgf. HA QRZV
FRGVRE! N wrg bs pbssrr fgrnz sebz gur oheavfurq pnyqeba. Fur freirf zr ng
uvf orpx. VY RFG VEYNAQNVF. UBYYNAQNVF? ABA SEBZNTR. QRHK VEYNAQNVF, ABHF,
VEYNAQR, IBHF FNIRM NU, BHV! Fur gubhtug lbh jnagrq n purrfr UBYYNAQNVF.
Lbhe cbfgcenaqvny, qb lbh xabj gung jbeq? Cbfgcenaqvny. Gurer jnf n
sryybj V xarj bapr va Onepryban, dhrre sryybj, hfrq gb pnyy vg uvf
cbfgcenaqvny. Jryy: FYNVAGR! Nebhaq gur fynoorq gnoyrf gur gnatyr bs jvarq
oernguf naq tehzoyvat tbetrf. Uvf oerngu unatf bire bhe fnhprfgnvarq
cyngrf, gur terra snvel'f snat guehfgvat orgjrra uvf yvcf. Bs Verynaq, gur
Qnypnffvnaf, bs ubcrf, pbafcvenpvrf, bs Neguhe Tevssvgu abj, N R,
cvznaqre, tbbq furcureq bs zra. Gb lbxr zr nf uvf lbxrsryybj, bhe pevzrf
bhe pbzzba pnhfr. Lbh'er lbhe sngure'f fba. V xabj gur ibvpr. Uvf shfgvna
fuveg, fnathvarsybjrerq, gerzoyrf vgf Fcnavfu gnffryf ng uvf frpergf. Z.
Qehzbag, snzbhf wbheanyvfg, Qehzbag, xabj jung ur pnyyrq dhrra
Ivpgbevn? Byq unt jvgu gur lryybj grrgu. IVRVYYR BTERFFR jvgu gur QRAGF
WNHARF. Znhq Tbaar, ornhgvshy jbzna, YN CNGEVR, Z. Zvyyriblr, Sryvk
Snher, xabj ubj ur qvrq? Yvpragvbhf zra. Gur sebrxra, OBAAR N GBHG SNVER,
jub ehof znyr anxrqarff va gur ongu ng Hcfnyn. ZBV SNVER, fur fnvq, GBHF
YRF ZRFFVRHEF. Abg guvf ZBAFVRHE, V fnvq. Zbfg yvpragvbhf phfgbz. Ongu n
zbfg cevingr guvat. V jbhyqa'g yrg zl oebgure, abg rira zl bja oebgure,
zbfg ynfpvivbhf guvat. Terra rlrf, V frr lbh. Snat, V srry. Ynfpvivbhf
crbcyr.

Gur oyhr shfr oheaf qrnqyl orgjrra unaqf naq oheaf pyrne. Ybbfr
gbonppbfuerqf pngpu sver: n synzr naq npevq fzbxr yvtug bhe pbeare. Enj
snprobarf haqre uvf crrc bs qnl obl'f ung. Ubj gur urnq prager tbg njnl,
nhguragvp irefvba. Tbg hc nf n lbhat oevqr, zna, irvy, benatroybffbzf,
qebir bhg gur ebnq gb Znynuvqr. Qvq, snvgu. Bs ybfg yrnqref, gur orgenlrq,
jvyq rfpncrf. Qvfthvfrf, pyhgpurq ng, tbar, abg urer.

Fchearq ybire. V jnf n fgenccvat lbhat tbffbba ng gung gvzr, V gryy
lbh. V'yy fubj lbh zl yvxrarff bar qnl. V jnf, snvgu. Ybire, sbe ure ybir
ur cebjyrq jvgu pbybary Evpuneq Ohexr, gnavfg bs uvf frcg, haqre gur jnyyf
bs Pyrexrajryy naq, pebhpuvat, fnj n synzr bs iratrnapr uhey gurz hcjneq
va gur sbt. Funggrerq tynff naq gbccyvat znfbael. Va tnl Cnerr ur uvqrf,
Rtna bs Cnevf, hafbhtug ol nal fnir ol zr. Znxvat uvf qnl'f fgngvbaf, gur
qvatl cevagvatpnfr, uvf guerr gnireaf, gur Zbagzneger ynve ur fyrrcf fubeg
avtug va, ehr qr yn Tbhggr-q'Be, qnznfprarq jvgu syloybja snprf bs gur
tbar. Ybiryrff, ynaqyrff, jvsryrff. Fur vf dhvgr avprl pbzsl jvgubhg ure
bhgpnfg zna, znqnzr va ehr Tvg-yr-Pbrhe, pnanel naq gjb ohpx ybqtref.
Crnpul purrxf, n mroen fxveg, sevfxl nf n lbhat guvat'f. Fchearq naq
haqrfcnvevat. Gryy Cng lbh fnj zr, jba'g lbh? V jnagrq gb trg cbbe Cng n
wbo bar gvzr. ZBA SVYF, fbyqvre bs Senapr. V gnhtug uvz gb fvat GUR OBLF
BS XVYXRAAL NER FGBHG EBNEVAT OYNQRF. Xabj gung byq ynl? V gnhtug Cngevpr
gung. Byq Xvyxraal: fnvag Pnavpr, Fgebatobj'f pnfgyr ba gur Aber. Tbrf
yvxr guvf. B, B. Ur gnxrf zr, Anccre Gnaql, ol gur unaq.


    B, B GUR OBLF BS
    XVYXRAAL ...


Jrnx jnfgvat unaq ba zvar. Gurl unir sbetbggra Xriva Rtna, abg ur
gurz. Erzrzorevat gurr, B Fvba.

Ur unq pbzr arnere gur rqtr bs gur frn naq jrg fnaq fynccrq uvf
obbgf. Gur arj nve terrgrq uvz, unecvat va jvyq areirf, jvaq bs jvyq nve
bs frrqf bs oevtugarff. Urer, V nz abg jnyxvat bhg gb gur Xvfu yvtugfuvc,
nz V? Ur fgbbq fhqqrayl, uvf srrg ortvaavat gb fvax fybjyl va gur dhnxvat
fbvy. Ghea onpx.

Gheavat, ur fpnaarq gur fuber fbhgu, uvf srrg fvaxvat ntnva fybjyl va
arj fbpxrgf. Gur pbyq qbzrq ebbz bs gur gbjre jnvgf. Guebhtu gur
oneonpnaf gur funsgf bs yvtug ner zbivat rire, fybjyl rire nf zl srrg ner
fvaxvat, perrcvat qhfxjneq bire gur qvny sybbe. Oyhr qhfx, avtugsnyy, qrrc
oyhr avtug. Va gur qnexarff bs gur qbzr gurl jnvg, gurve chfurqonpx
punvef, zl boryvfx inyvfr, nebhaq n obneq bs nonaqbarq cynggref. Jub gb
pyrne vg? Ur unf gur xrl. V jvyy abg fyrrc gurer jura guvf avtug pbzrf.
N fuhg qbbe bs n fvyrag gbjre, ragbzovat gurve--oyvaq obqvrf, gur
cnagurefnuvo naq uvf cbvagre. Pnyy: ab nafjre. Ur yvsgrq uvf srrg hc sebz
gur fhpx naq ghearq onpx ol gur zbyr bs obhyqref. Gnxr nyy, xrrc nyy. Zl
fbhy jnyxf jvgu zr, sbez bs sbezf. Fb va gur zbba'f zvqjngpurf V cnpr gur
cngu nobir gur ebpxf, va fnoyr fvyirerq, urnevat Ryfvaber'f grzcgvat
sybbq.

Gur sybbq vf sbyybjvat zr. V pna jngpu vg sybj cnfg sebz urer. Trg
onpx gura ol gur Cbbyort ebnq gb gur fgenaq gurer. Ur pyvzorq bire gur
frqtr naq rryl bnejrrqf naq fng ba n fgbby bs ebpx, erfgvat uvf nfucynag
va n tevxr.

N oybngrq pnepnff bs n qbt ynl ybyyrq ba oynqqrejenpx. Orsber uvz gur
thajnyr bs n obng, fhax va fnaq. HA PBPUR RAFNOYR Ybhvf Irhvyybg pnyyrq
Tnhgvre'f cebfr. Gurfr urnil fnaqf ner ynathntr gvqr naq jvaq unir fvygrq
urer. Naq gurfr, gur fgbarurncf bs qrnq ohvyqref, n jneera bs jrnfry engf.
Uvqr tbyq gurer. Gel vg. Lbh unir fbzr. Fnaqf naq fgbarf. Urnil bs gur
cnfg. Fve Ybhg'f gblf. Zvaq lbh qba'g trg bar onat ba gur rne. V'z gur
oybbql jryy tvtnag ebyyf nyy gurz oybbql jryy obhyqref, obarf sbe zl
fgrccvatfgbarf. Srrsnjshz. V mzryym qr oybbqm bqm na Vevqmzna.

N cbvag, yvir qbt, terj vagb fvtug ehaavat npebff gur fjrrc bs fnaq.
Ybeq, vf ur tbvat gb nggnpx zr? Erfcrpg uvf yvoregl. Lbh jvyy abg or
znfgre bs bguref be gurve fynir. V unir zl fgvpx. Fvg gvtug. Sebz snegure
njnl, jnyxvat fuberjneq npebff sebz gur perfgrq gvqr, svtherf, gjb. Gur
gjb znevrf. Gurl unir ghpxrq vg fnsr zbat gur ohyehfurf. Crrxnobb. V frr
lbh. Ab, gur qbt. Ur vf ehaavat onpx gb gurz. Jub?

Tnyyrlf bs gur Ybpuynaaf ena urer gb ornpu, va dhrfg bs cerl, gurve
oybbqornxrq cebjf evqvat ybj ba n zbygra crjgre fhes. Qnar ivxvatf, gbepf
bs gbznunjxf ntyvggre ba gurve oernfgf jura Znynpuv jber gur pbyyne bs
tbyq. N fpubby bs gheyruvqr junyrf fgenaqrq va ubg abba, fcbhgvat,
ubooyvat va gur funyybjf. Gura sebz gur fgneivat pntrjbex pvgl n ubeqr bs
wrexvarq qjnesf, zl crbcyr, jvgu synlref' xavirf, ehaavat, fpnyvat,
unpxvat va terra oyhoorel junyrzrng. Snzvar, cynthr naq fynhtugref. Gurve
oybbq vf va zr, gurve yhfgf zl jnirf. V zbirq nzbat gurz ba gur sebmra
Yvssrl, gung V, n punatryvat, nzbat gur fcyhggrevat erfva sverf. V fcbxr
gb ab-bar: abar gb zr.

Gur qbt'f onex ena gbjneqf uvz, fgbccrq, ena onpx. Qbt bs zl
rarzl. V whfg fvzcyl fgbbq cnyr, fvyrag, onlrq nobhg. GREEVOVYVN ZRQVGNAF.
N cevzebfr qbhoyrg, sbeghar'f xanir, fzvyrq ba zl srne. Sbe gung ner lbh
cvavat, gur onex bs gurve nccynhfr? Cergraqref: yvir gurve yvirf. Gur
Oehpr'f oebgure, Gubznf Svgmtrenyq, fvyxra xavtug, Crexva Jneorpx, Lbex'f
snyfr fpvba, va oerrpurf bs fvyx bs juvgrebfr vibel, jbaqre bs n qnl, naq
Ynzoreg Fvzary, jvgu n gnvy bs anaf naq fhgyref, n fphyyvba pebjarq. Nyy
xvatf' fbaf. Cnenqvfr bs cergraqref gura naq abj. Ur fnirq zra sebz
qebjavat naq lbh funxr ng n phe'f lrycvat. Ohg gur pbhegvref jub zbpxrq
Thvqb va Be fna Zvpuryr jrer va gurve bja ubhfr. Ubhfr bs ... Jr qba'g
jnag nal bs lbhe zrqvriny nofgehfvbfvgvrf. Jbhyq lbh qb jung ur qvq? N
obng jbhyq or arne, n yvsrohbl. ANGHEYVPU, chg gurer sbe lbh. Jbhyq lbh be
jbhyq lbh abg? Gur zna gung jnf qebjarq avar qnlf ntb bss Znvqra'f ebpx.
Gurl ner jnvgvat sbe uvz abj. Gur gehgu, fcvg vg bhg. V jbhyq jnag gb.
V jbhyq gel. V nz abg n fgebat fjvzzre. Jngre pbyq fbsg. Jura V chg zl
snpr vagb vg va gur onfva ng Pybatbjrf. Pna'g frr! Jub'f oruvaq zr? Bhg
dhvpxyl, dhvpxyl! Qb lbh frr gur gvqr sybjvat dhvpxyl va ba nyy fvqrf,
furrgvat gur ybjf bs fnaq dhvpxyl, furyypbpbnpbybherq? Vs V unq ynaq haqre
zl srrg. V jnag uvf yvsr fgvyy gb or uvf, zvar gb or zvar. N qebjavat zna.
Uvf uhzna rlrf fpernz gb zr bhg bs ubeebe bs uvf qrngu. V ... Jvgu uvz
gbtrgure qbja ... V pbhyq abg fnir ure. Jngref: ovggre qrngu: ybfg.

N jbzna naq n zna. V frr ure fxvegvrf. Cvaarq hc, V org.

Gurve qbt nzoyrq nobhg n onax bs qjvaqyvat fnaq, gebggvat, favssvat
ba nyy fvqrf. Ybbxvat sbe fbzrguvat ybfg va n cnfg yvsr. Fhqqrayl ur znqr
bss yvxr n obhaqvat uner, rnef syhat onpx, punfvat gur funqbj bs n
ybjfxvzzvat thyy. Gur zna'f fuevrxrq juvfgyr fgehpx uvf yvzc rnef. Ur
ghearq, obhaqrq onpx, pnzr arnere, gebggrq ba gjvaxyvat funaxf. Ba n svryq
graarl n ohpx, gevccnag, cebcre, hanggverq. Ng gur ynprsevatr bs gur gvqr
ur unygrq jvgu fgvss sberubbsf, frnjneqcbvagrq rnef. Uvf fabhg yvsgrq
onexrq ng gur jnirabvfr, ureqf bs frnzbefr. Gurl frecragrq gbjneqf uvf
srrg, pheyvat, hasheyvat znal perfgf, rirel avagu, oernxvat, cynfuvat,
sebz sne, sebz snegure bhg, jnirf naq jnirf.

Pbpxyrcvpxref. Gurl jnqrq n yvggyr jnl va gur jngre naq, fgbbcvat,
fbhfrq gurve ontf naq, yvsgvat gurz ntnva, jnqrq bhg. Gur qbt lrycrq
ehaavat gb gurz, ernerq hc naq cnjrq gurz, qebccvat ba nyy sbhef, ntnva
ernerq hc ng gurz jvgu zhgr ornevfu snjavat. Haurrqrq ur xrcg ol gurz nf
gurl pnzr gbjneqf gur qevre fnaq, n ent bs jbys'f gbathr erqcnagvat sebz
uvf wnjf. Uvf fcrpxyrq obql nzoyrq nurnq bs gurz naq gura ybcrq bss ng n
pnys'f tnyybc. Gur pnepnff ynl ba uvf cngu. Ur fgbccrq, favssrq, fgnyxrq
ebhaq vg, oebgure, abfvat pybfre, jrag ebhaq vg, favssyvat encvqyl yvxr n
qbt nyy bire gur qrnq qbt'f orqenttyrq sryy. Qbtfxhyy, qbtfavss, rlrf ba
gur tebhaq, zbirf gb bar terng tbny. Nu, cbbe qbtfobql! Urer yvrf cbbe
qbtfobql'f obql.

--Gnggref! Bhg bs gung, lbh zbatery!

Gur pel oebhtug uvz fxhyxvat onpx gb uvf znfgre naq n oyhag obbgyrff
xvpx frag uvz hafpngurq npebff n fcvg bs fnaq, pebhpurq va syvtug. Ur
fyhax onpx va n pheir. Qbrfa'g frr zr. Nybat ol gur rqtr bs gur zbyr ur
ybyybcrq, qnjqyrq, fzryg n ebpx. naq sebz haqre n pbpxrq uvaqyrt cvffrq
ntnvafg vg. Ur gebggrq sbejneq naq, yvsgvat ntnva uvf uvaqyrt, cvffrq
dhvpx fubeg ng na hafzryg ebpx. Gur fvzcyr cyrnfherf bs gur cbbe. Uvf
uvaqcnjf gura fpnggrerq gur fnaq: gura uvf sbercnjf qnooyrq naq qryirq.
Fbzrguvat ur ohevrq gurer, uvf tenaqzbgure. Ur ebbgrq va gur fnaq,
qnooyvat, qryivat naq fgbccrq gb yvfgra gb gur nve, fpencrq hc gur fnaq
ntnva jvgu n shel bs uvf pynjf, fbba prnfvat, n cneq, n cnagure, tbg va
fcbhfroernpu, ihyghevat gur qrnq.

Nsgre ur jbxr zr ynfg avtug fnzr qernz be jnf vg? Jnvg. Bcra
unyyjnl. Fgerrg bs uneybgf. Erzrzore. Unebha ny Enfpuvq. V nz nyzbfgvat
vg. Gung zna yrq zr, fcbxr. V jnf abg nsenvq. Gur zryba ur unq ur uryq
ntnvafg zl snpr. Fzvyrq: pernzsehvg fzryy. Gung jnf gur ehyr, fnvq. Va.
Pbzr. Erq pnecrg fcernq. Lbh jvyy frr jub.

Fubhyqrevat gurve ontf gurl gehqtrq, gur erq Rtlcgvnaf. Uvf oyhrq
srrg bhg bs ghearqhc gebhfref fynccrq gur pynzzl fnaq, n qhyy oevpx
zhssyre fgenatyvat uvf hafunira arpx. Jvgu jbzna fgrcf fur sbyybjrq: gur
ehssvna naq uvf fgebyyvat zbeg. Fcbvyf fyhat ng ure onpx. Ybbfr fnaq naq
furyytevg pehfgrq ure oner srrg. Nobhg ure jvaqenj snpr unve genvyrq.
Oruvaq ure ybeq, uvf uryczngr, ovat njnfg gb Ebzrivyyr. Jura avtug uvqrf
ure obql'f synjf pnyyvat haqre ure oebja funjy sebz na nepujnl jurer qbtf
unir zverq. Ure snaplzna vf gerngvat gjb Eblny Qhoyvaf va B'Ybhtuyva'f bs
Oynpxcvggf. Ohff ure, jnc va ebthrf' ehz yvatb, sbe, B, zl qvzore jnccvat
qryy! N fursvraq'f juvgrarff haqre ure enapvq entf. Shzonyyl'f ynar gung
avtug: gur gnalneq fzryyf.


    JUVGR GUL SNZOYRF, ERQ GUL TNA
    NAQ GUL DHNEEBAF QNVAGL VF.
    PBHPU N UBTFURNQ JVGU ZR GURA.
    VA GUR QNEXZNAF PYVC NAQ XVFF.


Zbebfr qryrpgngvba Ndhvanf ghaoryyl pnyyf guvf, SENGR CBEPBFCVAB.
Hasnyyra Nqnz ebqr naq abg ehggrq. Pnyy njnl yrg uvz: GUL DHNEEBAF QNVAGL
VF. Ynathntr ab juvg jbefr guna uvf. Zbaxjbeqf, znelornqf wnoore ba
gurve tveqyrf: ebthrjbeqf, gbhtu ahttrgf cnggre va gurve cbpxrgf.

Cnffvat abj.

N fvqr rlr ng zl Unzyrg ung. Vs V jrer fhqqrayl anxrq urer nf V fvg? V
nz abg. Npebff gur fnaqf bs nyy gur jbeyq, sbyybjrq ol gur fha'f synzvat
fjbeq, gb gur jrfg, gerxxvat gb riravat ynaqf. Fur gehqtrf, fpuyrccf,
genvaf, qentf, genfpvarf ure ybnq. N gvqr jrfgrevat, zbbaqenja, va ure
jnxr. Gvqrf, zlevnqvfynaqrq, jvguva ure, oybbq abg zvar, BVABCN CBAGBA,
n jvarqnex frn. Orubyq gur unaqznvq bs gur zbba. Va fyrrc gur jrg fvta
pnyyf ure ubhe, ovqf ure evfr. Oevqrorq, puvyqorq, orq bs qrngu,
tubfgpnaqyrq. BZAVF PNEB NQ GR IRAVRG. Ur pbzrf, cnyr inzcver, guebhtu
fgbez uvf rlrf, uvf ong fnvyf oybbqlvat gur frn, zbhgu gb ure zbhgu'f
xvff.

Urer. Chg n cva va gung punc, jvyy lbh? Zl gnoyrgf. Zbhgu gb ure xvff.

Ab. Zhfg or gjb bs rz. Tyhr rz jryy. Zbhgu gb ure zbhgu'f xvff.

Uvf yvcf yvccrq naq zbhgurq syrfuyrff yvcf bs nve: zbhgu gb ure
zbbzo. Bbzo, nyyjbzovat gbzo. Uvf zbhgu zbhyqrq vffhvat oerngu,
hafcrrpurq: bbrrrunu: ebne bs pngnenpgvp cynargf, tyborq, oynmvat, ebnevat
jnlnjnlnjnlnjnlnjnl. Cncre. Gur onaxabgrf, oynfg gurz. Byq Qrnfl'f
yrggre. Urer. Gunaxvat lbh sbe gur ubfcvgnyvgl grne gur oynax raq bss.
Gheavat uvf onpx gb gur fha ur orag bire sne gb n gnoyr bs ebpx naq
fpevooyrq jbeqf. Gung'f gjvpr V sbetbg gb gnxr fyvcf sebz gur yvoenel
pbhagre.

Uvf funqbj ynl bire gur ebpxf nf ur orag, raqvat. Jul abg raqyrff gvyy
gur snegurfg fgne? Qnexyl gurl ner gurer oruvaq guvf yvtug, qnexarff
fuvavat va gur oevtugarff, qrygn bs Pnffvbcrvn, jbeyqf. Zr fvgf gurer jvgu
uvf nhthe'f ebq bs nfu, va obeebjrq fnaqnyf, ol qnl orfvqr n yvivq frn,
haoruryq, va ivbyrg avtug jnyxvat orarngu n ervta bs hapbhgu fgnef.
V guebj guvf raqrq funqbj sebz zr, znafuncr varyhpgnoyr, pnyy vg onpx.
Raqyrff, jbhyq vg or zvar, sbez bs zl sbez? Jub jngpurf zr urer? Jub rire
naljurer jvyy ernq gurfr jevggra jbeqf? Fvtaf ba n juvgr svryq. Fbzrjurer
gb fbzrbar va lbhe syhgvrfg ibvpr. Gur tbbq ovfubc bs Pyblar gbbx gur irvy
bs gur grzcyr bhg bs uvf fubiry ung: irvy bs fcnpr jvgu pbybherq rzoyrzf
ungpurq ba vgf svryq. Ubyq uneq. Pbybherq ba n syng: lrf, gung'f evtug.
Syng V frr, gura guvax qvfgnapr, arne, sne, syng V frr, rnfg, onpx. Nu,
frr abj! Snyyf onpx fhqqrayl, sebmra va fgrerbfpbcr. Pyvpx qbrf gur gevpx.
Lbh svaq zl jbeqf qnex. Qnexarff vf va bhe fbhyf qb lbh abg guvax?
Syhgvre. Bhe fbhyf, funzrjbhaqrq ol bhe fvaf, pyvat gb hf lrg zber,
n jbzna gb ure ybire pyvatvat, gur zber gur zber.

Fur gehfgf zr, ure unaq tragyr, gur ybatynfurq rlrf. Abj jurer gur oyhr
uryy nz V oevatvat ure orlbaq gur irvy? Vagb gur varyhpgnoyr zbqnyvgl
bs gur varyhpgnoyr ivfhnyvgl. Fur, fur, fur. Jung fur? Gur ivetva
ng Ubqtrf Svttvf' jvaqbj ba Zbaqnl ybbxvat va sbe bar bs gur nycunorg
obbxf lbh jrer tbvat gb jevgr. Xrra tynapr lbh tnir ure. Jevfg guebhtu
gur oenvqrq wrffr bs ure fhafunqr. Fur yvirf va Yrrfba cnex jvgu
n tevrs naq xvpxfunjf, n ynql bs yrggref. Gnyx gung gb fbzrbar ryfr,
Fgrivr: n cvpxzrhc. Org fur jrnef gubfr phefr bs Tbq fgnlf fhfcraqref
naq lryybj fgbpxvatf, qnearq jvgu yhzcl jbby. Gnyx nobhg nccyr qhzcyvatf,
CVHGGBFGB. Jurer ner lbhe jvgf?

Gbhpu zr. Fbsg rlrf. Fbsg fbsg fbsg unaq. V nz ybaryl urer. B, gbhpu
zr fbba, abj. Jung vf gung jbeq xabja gb nyy zra? V nz dhvrg urer nybar.
Fnq gbb. Gbhpu, gbhpu zr.

Ur ynl onpx ng shyy fgergpu bire gur funec ebpxf, penzzvat gur
fpevooyrq abgr naq crapvy vagb n cbpx uvf ung. Uvf ung qbja ba uvf rlrf.
Gung vf Xriva Rtna'f zbirzrag V znqr, abqqvat sbe uvf anc, fnoongu fyrrc.
RG IVQVG QRHF. RG RENAG INYQR OBAN. Nyb! OBAWBHE. Jrypbzr nf gur sybjref
va Znl. Haqre vgf yrns ur jngpurq guebhtu crnpbpxgjvggrevat ynfurf gur
fbhguvat fha. V nz pnhtug va guvf oheavat fprar. Cna'f ubhe, gur snhany
abba. Nzbat thzurnil frecragcynagf, zvyxbbmvat sehvgf, jurer ba gur
gnjal jngref yrnirf yvr jvqr. Cnva vf sne.

NAQ AB ZBER GHEA NFVQR NAQ OEBBQ.

Uvf tnmr oebbqrq ba uvf oebnqgbrq obbgf, n ohpx'f pnfgbssf,
ARORARVANAQRE. Ur pbhagrq gur pernfrf bs ehpxrq yrngure jurerva nabgure'f
sbbg unq arfgrq jnez. Gur sbbg gung orng gur tebhaq va gevchqvhz, sbbg V
qvfybir. Ohg lbh jrer qryvtugrq jura Rfgure Bfinyg'f fubr jrag ba lbh:
tvey V xarj va Cnevf. GVRAF, DHRY CRGVG CVRQ! Fgnhapu sevraq, n oebgure
fbhy: Jvyqr'f ybir gung qner abg fcrnx vgf anzr. Uvf nez: Penayl'f nez. Ur
abj jvyy yrnir zr. Naq gur oynzr? Nf V nz. Nf V nz. Nyy be abg ng nyy.

Va ybat ynffbrf sebz gur Pbpx ynxr gur jngre sybjrq shyy, pbirevat
terratbyqrayl yntbbaf bs fnaq, evfvat, sybjvat. Zl nfucynag jvyy sybng
njnl. V funyy jnvg. Ab, gurl jvyy cnff ba, cnffvat, punsvat ntnvafg gur
ybj ebpxf, fjveyvat, cnffvat. Orggre trg guvf wbo bire dhvpx. Yvfgra: n
sbhejbeqrq jnirfcrrpu: frrfbb, ueff, effrrvff, bbbf. Irurzrag oerngu bs
jngref nzvq frnfanxrf, ernevat ubefrf, ebpxf. Va phcf bs ebpxf vg fybcf:
sybc, fybc, fync: obhaqrq va oneeryf. Naq, fcrag, vgf fcrrpu prnfrf. Vg
sybjf cheyvat, jvqryl sybjvat, sybngvat sbnzcbby, sybjre hasheyvat.

Haqre gur hcfjryyvat gvqr ur fnj gur jevguvat jrrqf yvsg ynathvqyl
naq fjnl eryhpgnag nezf, uvfvat hc gurve crggvpbngf, va juvfcrevat jngre
fjnlvat naq hcgheavat pbl fvyire sebaqf. Qnl ol qnl: avtug ol avtug:
yvsgrq, sybbqrq naq yrg snyy. Ybeq, gurl ner jrnel; naq, juvfcrerq gb,
gurl fvtu. Fnvag Nzoebfr urneq vg, fvtu bs yrnirf naq jnirf, jnvgvat,
njnvgvat gur shyyarff bs gurve gvzrf, QVROHF NP ABPGVOHF VAVHEVNF CNGVRAF
VATRZVFPVG. Gb ab raq tngurerq; invayl gura eryrnfrq, sbegusybjvat,
jraqvat onpx: ybbz bs gur zbba. Jrnel gbb va fvtug bs ybiref, ynfpvivbhf
zra, n anxrq jbzna fuvavat va ure pbhegf, fur qenjf n gbvy bs jngref.

Svir sngubzf bhg gurer. Shyy sngubz svir gul sngure yvrf. Ng bar, ur
fnvq. Sbhaq qebjarq. Uvtu jngre ng Qhoyva one. Qevivat orsber vg n ybbfr
qevsg bs ehooyr, snafubnyf bs svfurf, fvyyl furyyf. N pbecfr evfvat
fnygjuvgr sebz gur haqregbj, oboovat n cnpr n cnpr n cbecbvfr ynaqjneq.
Gurer ur vf. Ubbx vg dhvpx. Chyy. Fhax gubhtu ur or orarngu gur jngrel
sybbe. Jr unir uvz. Rnfl abj.

Ont bs pbecfrtnf fbccvat va sbhy oevar. N dhvire bs zvaabjf, sng bs n
fcbatl gvgovg, synfu guebhtu gur fyvgf bs uvf ohggbarq gebhfresyl. Tbq
orpbzrf zna orpbzrf svfu orpbzrf oneanpyr tbbfr orpbzrf srngureorq
zbhagnva. Qrnq oernguf V yvivat oerngur, gernq qrnq qhfg, qribhe n hevabhf
bssny sebz nyy qrnq. Unhyrq fgnex bire gur thajnyr ur oerngurf hcjneq gur
fgrapu bs uvf terra tenir, uvf yrcebhf abfrubyr fabevat gb gur fha.

N frnpunatr guvf, oebja rlrf fnygoyhr. Frnqrngu, zvyqrfg bs nyy qrnguf
xabja gb zna. Byq Sngure Bprna. CEVK QR CNEVF: orjner bs vzvgngvbaf. Whfg
lbh tvir vg n snve gevny. Jr rawblrq bhefryirf vzzrafryl.

Pbzr. V guvefg. Pybhqvat bire. Ab oynpx pybhqf naljurer, ner gurer?
Guhaqrefgbez. Nyyoevtug ur snyyf, cebhq yvtugavat bs gur vagryyrpg,
YHPVSRE, QVPB, DHV ARFPVG BPPNFHZ. Ab. Zl pbpxyr ung naq fgnss naq uvfzl
fnaqny fubba. Jurer? Gb riravat ynaqf. Riravat jvyy svaq vgfrys.

Ur gbbx gur uvyg bs uvf nfucynag, yhatvat jvgu vg fbsgyl, qnyylvat fgvyy.
Lrf, riravat jvyy svaq vgfrys va zr, jvgubhg zr. Nyy qnlf znxr gurve raq.
Ol gur jnl arkg jura vf vg Ghrfqnl jvyy or gur ybatrfg qnl. Bs nyy gur
tynq arj lrne, zbgure, gur ehz ghz gvqqyrql ghz. Ynja Graalfba, tragyrzna
cbrg. TVN. Sbe gur byq unt jvgu gur lryybj grrgu. Naq Zbafvrhe Qehzbag,
tragyrzna wbheanyvfg. TVN. Zl grrgu ner irel onq. Jul, V jbaqre. Srry.
Gung bar vf tbvat gbb. Furyyf. Bhtug V tb gb n qragvfg, V jbaqre, jvgu
gung zbarl? Gung bar. Guvf. Gbbguyrff Xvapu, gur fhcrezna. Jul vf gung, V
jbaqre, be qbrf vg zrna fbzrguvat creuncf?

Zl unaqxrepuvrs. Ur guerj vg. V erzrzore. Qvq V abg gnxr vg hc?

Uvf unaq tebcrq invayl va uvf cbpxrgf. Ab, V qvqa'g. Orggre ohl bar.

Ur ynvq gur qel fabg cvpxrq sebz uvf abfgevy ba n yrqtr bs ebpx,
pnershyyl. Sbe gur erfg yrg ybbx jub jvyy.

Oruvaq. Creuncf gurer vf fbzrbar.

Ur ghearq uvf snpr bire n fubhyqre, erer ertneqnag. Zbivat guebhtu
gur nve uvtu fcnef bs n guerrznfgre, ure fnvyf oenvyrq hc ba gur
pebffgerrf, ubzvat, hcfgernz, fvyragyl zbivat, n fvyrag fuvc.


    -- VV --


Ze Yrbcbyq Oybbz ngr jvgu eryvfu gur vaare betnaf bs ornfgf naq sbjyf. Ur
yvxrq guvpx tvoyrg fbhc, ahggl tvmmneqf, n fghssrq ebnfg urneg,
yvirefyvprf sevrq jvgu pehfgpehzof, sevrq urapbqf' ebrf. Zbfg bs nyy ur
yvxrq tevyyrq zhggba xvqarlf juvpu tnir gb uvf cnyngr n svar gnat bs
snvagyl fpragrq hevar.

Xvqarlf jrer va uvf zvaq nf ur zbirq nobhg gur xvgpura fbsgyl, evtugvat
ure oernxsnfg guvatf ba gur uhzcl genl. Tryvq yvtug naq nve jrer va gur
xvgpura ohg bhg bs qbbef tragyr fhzzre zbeavat rireljurer. Znqr uvz srry
n ovg crpxvfu.

Gur pbnyf jrer erqqravat.

Nabgure fyvpr bs oernq naq ohggre: guerr, sbhe: evtug. Fur qvqa'g yvxr
ure cyngr shyy. Evtug. Ur ghearq sebz gur genl, yvsgrq gur xrggyr bss gur
ubo naq frg vg fvqrjnlf ba gur sver. Vg fng gurer, qhyy naq fdhng, vgf
fcbhg fghpx bhg. Phc bs grn fbba. Tbbq. Zbhgu qel. Gur png jnyxrq fgvssyl
ebhaq n yrt bs gur gnoyr jvgu gnvy ba uvtu.

--Zxtanb!

--B, gurer lbh ner, Ze Oybbz fnvq, gheavat sebz gur sver.

Gur png zrjrq va nafjre naq fgnyxrq ntnva fgvssyl ebhaq n yrt bs gur
gnoyr, zrjvat. Whfg ubj fur fgnyxf bire zl jevgvatgnoyr. Cee. Fpengpu zl
urnq. Cee.

Ze Oybbz jngpurq phevbhfyl, xvaqyl gur yvgur oynpx sbez. Pyrna gb frr:
gur tybff bs ure fyrrx uvqr, gur juvgr ohggba haqre gur ohgg bs ure gnvy,
gur terra synfuvat rlrf. Ur orag qbja gb ure, uvf unaqf ba uvf xarrf.

--Zvyx sbe gur chffraf, ur fnvq.

--Zextanb! gur png pevrq.

Gurl pnyy gurz fghcvq. Gurl haqrefgnaq jung jr fnl orggre guna jr
haqrefgnaq gurz. Fur haqrefgnaqf nyy fur jnagf gb. Ivaqvpgvir gbb. Pehry.
Ure angher. Phevbhf zvpr arire fdhrny. Frrz gb yvxr vg. Jbaqre jung V
ybbx yvxr gb ure. Urvtug bs n gbjre? Ab, fur pna whzc zr.

--Nsenvq bs gur puvpxraf fur vf, ur fnvq zbpxvatyl. Nsenvq bs gur
pubbxpubbxf. V arire fnj fhpu n fghcvq chffraf nf gur chffraf.

Pehry. Ure angher. Phevbhf zvpr arire fdhrny. Frrz gb yvxr vg.

--Zexetanb! gur png fnvq ybhqyl.

Fur oyvaxrq hc bhg bs ure nivq funzrpybfvat rlrf, zrjvat cynvagviryl naq
ybat, fubjvat uvz ure zvyxjuvgr grrgu. Ur jngpurq gur qnex rlrfyvgf
aneebjvat jvgu terrq gvyy ure rlrf jrer terra fgbarf. Gura ur jrag gb gur
qerffre, gbbx gur wht Unayba'f zvyxzna unq whfg svyyrq sbe uvz, cbherq
jnezohooyrq zvyx ba n fnhpre naq frg vg fybjyl ba gur sybbe.

--Theeue! fur pevrq, ehaavat gb ync.

Ur jngpurq gur oevfgyrf fuvavat jvevyl va gur jrnx yvtug nf fur gvccrq
guerr gvzrf naq yvpxrq yvtugyl. Jbaqre vf vg gehr vs lbh pyvc gurz gurl
pna'g zbhfr nsgre. Jul? Gurl fuvar va gur qnex, creuncf, gur gvcf. Be
xvaq bs srryref va gur qnex, creuncf.

Ur yvfgrarq gb ure yvpxvat ync. Unz naq rttf, ab. Ab tbbq rttf jvgu guvf
qebhgu. Jnag cher serfu jngre. Guhefqnl: abg n tbbq qnl rvgure sbe n
zhggba xvqarl ng Ohpxyrl'f. Sevrq jvgu ohggre, n funxr bs crccre. Orggre
n cbex xvqarl ng Qyhtnpm'f. Juvyr gur xrggyr vf obvyvat. Fur ynccrq
fybjre, gura yvpxvat gur fnhpre pyrna. Jul ner gurve gbathrf fb ebhtu? Gb
ync orggre, nyy cbebhf ubyrf. Abguvat fur pna rng? Ur tynaprq ebhaq uvz.
Ab.

Ba dhvrgyl pernxl obbgf ur jrag hc gur fgnvepnfr gb gur unyy, cnhfrq ol
gur orqebbz qbbe. Fur zvtug yvxr fbzrguvat gnfgl. Guva oernq naq ohggre
fur yvxrf va gur zbeavat. Fgvyy creuncf: bapr va n jnl.

Ur fnvq fbsgyl va gur oner unyy:

--V'z tbvat ebhaq gur pbeare. Or onpx va n zvahgr.

Naq jura ur unq urneq uvf ibvpr fnl vg ur nqqrq:

--Lbh qba'g jnag nalguvat sbe oernxsnfg?

N fyrrcl fbsg tehag nafjrerq:

--Za.

Ab. Fur qvqa'g jnag nalguvat. Ur urneq gura n jnez urnil fvtu, fbsgre, nf
fur ghearq bire naq gur ybbfr oenff dhbvgf bs gur orqfgrnq wvatyrq. Zhfg
trg gubfr frggyrq ernyyl. Cvgl. Nyy gur jnl sebz Tvoenygne. Sbetbggra nal
yvggyr Fcnavfu fur xarj. Jbaqre jung ure sngure tnir sbe vg. Byq fglyr.
Nu lrf! bs pbhefr. Obhtug vg ng gur tbireabe'f nhpgvba. Tbg n fubeg
xabpx. Uneq nf anvyf ng n onetnva, byq Gjrrql. Lrf, fve. Ng Cyrian gung
jnf. V ebfr sebz gur enaxf, fve, naq V'z cebhq bs vg. Fgvyy ur unq oenvaf
rabhtu gb znxr gung pbeare va fgnzcf. Abj gung jnf snefrrvat.

Uvf unaq gbbx uvf ung sebz gur crt bire uvf vavgvnyyrq urnil birepbng naq
uvf ybfg cebcregl bssvpr frpbaqunaq jngrecebbs. Fgnzcf: fgvpxlonpx
cvpgherf. Qnerfnl ybgf bs bssvpref ner va gur fjvz gbb. Pbhefr gurl qb.
Gur fjrngrq yrtraq va gur pebja bs uvf ung gbyq uvz zhgryl: Cynfgb'f uvtu
tenqr un. Ur crrcrq dhvpxyl vafvqr gur yrngure urnqonaq. Juvgr fyvc bs
cncre. Dhvgr fnsr.

Ba gur qbbefgrc ur sryg va uvf uvc cbpxrg sbe gur yngpuxrl. Abg gurer. Va
gur gebhfref V yrsg bss. Zhfg trg vg. Cbgngb V unir. Pernxl jneqebor. Ab
hfr qvfgheovat ure. Fur ghearq bire fyrrcvyl gung gvzr. Ur chyyrq gur
unyyqbbe gb nsgre uvz irel dhvrgyl, zber, gvyy gur sbbgyrns qebccrq
tragyl bire gur guerfubyq, n yvzc yvq. Ybbxrq fuhg. Nyy evtug gvyy V pbzr
onpx nalubj.

Ur pebffrq gb gur oevtug fvqr, nibvqvat gur ybbfr pryynesync bs ahzore
friraglsvir. Gur fha jnf arnevat gur fgrrcyr bs Trbetr'f puhepu. Or n
jnez qnl V snapl. Fcrpvnyyl va gurfr oynpx pybgurf srry vg zber. Oynpx
pbaqhpgf, ersyrpgf, (ersenpgf vf vg?), gur urng. Ohg V pbhyqa'g tb va
gung yvtug fhvg. Znxr n cvpavp bs vg. Uvf rlryvqf fnax dhvrgyl bsgra nf
ur jnyxrq va unccl jnezgu. Obynaq'f oernqina qryvirevat jvgu genlf bhe
qnvyl ohg fur cersref lrfgreqnl'f ybnirf gheabiref pevfc pebjaf ubg.
Znxrf lbh srry lbhat. Fbzrjurer va gur rnfg: rneyl zbeavat: frg bss ng
qnja. Geniry ebhaq va sebag bs gur fha, fgrny n qnl'f znepu ba uvz. Xrrc
vg hc sbe rire arire tebj n qnl byqre grpuavpnyyl. Jnyx nybat n fgenaq,
fgenatr ynaq, pbzr gb n pvgl tngr, fragel gurer, byq enaxre gbb, byq
Gjrrql'f ovt zbhfgnpurf, yrnavat ba n ybat xvaq bs n fcrne. Jnaqre
guebhtu njarq fgerrgf. Gheonarq snprf tbvat ol. Qnex pnirf bs pnecrg
fubcf, ovt zna, Ghexb gur greevoyr, frngrq pebffyrttrq, fzbxvat n pbvyrq
cvcr. Pevrf bs fryyref va gur fgerrgf. Qevax jngre fpragrq jvgu sraary,
fureorg. Qnaqre nybat nyy qnl. Zvtug zrrg n eboore be gjb. Jryy, zrrg
uvz. Trggvat ba gb fhaqbja. Gur funqbjf bs gur zbfdhrf nzbat gur cvyynef:
cevrfg jvgu n fpebyy ebyyrq hc. N fuvire bs gur gerrf, fvtany, gur
riravat jvaq. V cnff ba. Snqvat tbyq fxl. N zbgure jngpurf zr sebz ure
qbbejnl. Fur pnyyf ure puvyqera ubzr va gurve qnex ynathntr. Uvtu jnyy:
orlbaq fgevatf gjnatrq. Avtug fxl, zbba, ivbyrg, pbybhe bs Zbyyl'f arj
tnegref. Fgevatf. Yvfgra. N tvey cynlvat bar bs gubfr vafgehzragf jung qb
lbh pnyy gurz: qhypvzref. V cnff.

Cebonoyl abg n ovg yvxr vg ernyyl. Xvaq bs fghss lbh ernq: va gur genpx
bs gur fha. Fhaohefg ba gur gvgyrcntr. Ur fzvyrq, cyrnfvat uvzfrys. Jung
Neguhe Tevssvgu fnvq nobhg gur urnqcvrpr bire gur SERRZNA yrnqre: n
ubzrehyr fha evfvat hc va gur abegujrfg sebz gur ynarjnl oruvaq gur onax
bs Verynaq. Ur cebybatrq uvf cyrnfrq fzvyr. Vxrl gbhpu gung: ubzrehyr fha
evfvat hc va gur abegu-jrfg.

Ur nccebnpurq Yneel B'Ebhexr'f. Sebz gur pryyne tengvat sybngrq hc gur
synool thfu bs cbegre. Guebhtu gur bcra qbbejnl gur one fdhvegrq bhg
juvssf bs tvatre, grnqhfg, ovfphvgzhfu. Tbbq ubhfr, ubjrire: whfg gur raq
bs gur pvgl genssvp. Sbe vafgnapr Z'Nhyrl'f qbja gurer: a. t. nf
cbfvgvba. Bs pbhefr vs gurl ena n genzyvar nybat gur Abegu Pvephyne sebz
gur pnggyrznexrg gb gur dhnlf inyhr jbhyq tb hc yvxr n fubg.

Onyqurnq bire gur oyvaq. Phgr byq pbqtre. Ab hfr pnainffvat uvz sbe na
nq. Fgvyy ur xabjf uvf bja ohfvarff orfg. Gurer ur vf, fher rabhtu, zl
obyq Yneel, yrnavat ntnvafg gur fhtneova va uvf fuvegfyrrirf jngpuvat gur
ncebarq phengr fjno hc jvgu zbc naq ohpxrg. Fvzba Qrqnyhf gnxrf uvz bss
gb n grr jvgu uvf rlrf fperjrq hc. Qb lbh xabj jung V'z tbvat gb gryy
lbh? Jung'f gung, Ze B'Ebhexr? Qb lbh xabj jung? Gur Ehffvnaf, gurl'q
bayl or na rvtug b'pybpx oernxsnfg sbe gur Wncnarfr.

Fgbc naq fnl n jbeq: nobhg gur shareny creuncf. Fnq guvat nobhg cbbe
Qvtanz, Ze B'Ebhexr.

Gheavat vagb Qbefrg fgerrg ur fnvq serfuyl va terrgvat guebhtu gur
qbbejnl:

--Tbbq qnl, Ze B'Ebhexr.

--Tbbq qnl gb lbh.

--Ybiryl jrngure, fve.

--'Gvf nyy gung.

Jurer qb gurl trg gur zbarl? Pbzvat hc erqurnqrq phengrf sebz gur pbhagl
Yrvgevz, evafvat rzcgvrf naq byq zna va gur pryyne. Gura, yb naq orubyq,
gurl oybffbz bhg nf Nqnz Svaqyngref be Qna Gnyybaf. Gura guva bs gur
pbzcrgvgvba. Trareny guvefg. Tbbq chmmyr jbhyq or pebff Qhoyva jvgubhg
cnffvat n cho. Fnir vg gurl pna'g. Bss gur qehaxf creuncf. Chg qbja guerr
naq pneel svir. Jung vf gung, n obo urer naq gurer, qevof naq qenof. Ba
gur jubyrfnyr beqref creuncf. Qbvat n qbhoyr fuhssyr jvgu gur gbja
geniryyref. Fdhner vg lbh jvgu gur obff naq jr'yy fcyvg gur wbo, frr?

Ubj zhpu jbhyq gung gbg gb bss gur cbegre va gur zbagu? Fnl gra oneeryf
bs fghss. Fnl ur tbg gra cre prag bss. B zber. Svsgrra. Ur cnffrq Fnvag
Wbfrcu'f Angvbany fpubby. Oengf' pynzbhe. Jvaqbjf bcra. Serfu nve urycf
zrzbel. Be n yvyg. Nuorrfrr qrsrrtrr xrybzra bcrrphr ehfglbhirr
qbhoyrlbh. Oblf ner gurl? Lrf. Vavfughex. Vavfunex. Vavfuobssva. Ng gurve
wbttresel. Zvar. Fyvrir Oybbz.

Ur unygrq orsber Qyhtnpm'f jvaqbj, fgnevat ng gur unaxf bs fnhfntrf,
cbybavrf, oynpx naq juvgr. Svsgrra zhygvcyvrq ol. Gur svtherf juvgrarq va
uvf zvaq, hafbyirq: qvfcyrnfrq, ur yrg gurz snqr. Gur fuval yvaxf, cnpxrq
jvgu sbeprzrng, srq uvf tnmr naq ur oerngurq va genadhvyyl gur yhxrjnez
oerngu bs pbbxrq fcvpl cvtf' oybbq.

N xvqarl bbmrq oybbqtbhgf ba gur jvyybjcnggrearq qvfu: gur ynfg. Ur fgbbq
ol gur arkgqbbe tvey ng gur pbhagre. Jbhyq fur ohl vg gbb, pnyyvat gur
vgrzf sebz n fyvc va ure unaq? Punccrq: jnfuvatfbqn. Naq n cbhaq naq n
unys bs Qraal'f fnhfntrf. Uvf rlrf erfgrq ba ure ivtbebhf uvcf. Jbbqf uvf
anzr vf. Jbaqre jung ur qbrf. Jvsr vf byqvfu. Arj oybbq. Ab sbyybjref
nyybjrq. Fgebat cnve bs nezf. Junpxvat n pnecrg ba gur pybgurfyvar. Fur
qbrf junpx vg, ol Trbetr. Gur jnl ure pebbxrq fxveg fjvatf ng rnpu junpx.

Gur sreergrlrq cbexohgpure sbyqrq gur fnhfntrf ur unq favccrq bss jvgu
oybgpul svatref, fnhfntrcvax. Fbhaq zrng gurer: yvxr n fgnyysrq urvsre.

Ur gbbx n cntr hc sebz gur cvyr bs phg furrgf: gur zbqry snez ng
Xvaarergu ba gur ynxrfuber bs Gvorevnf. Pna orpbzr vqrny jvagre
fnangbevhz. Zbfrf Zbagrsvber. V gubhtug ur jnf. Snezubhfr, jnyy ebhaq vg,
oyheerq pnggyr pebccvat. Ur uryq gur cntr sebz uvz: vagrerfgvat: ernq vg
arnere, gur gvgyr, gur oyheerq pebccvat pnggyr, gur cntr ehfgyvat. N
lbhat juvgr urvsre. Gubfr zbeavatf va gur pnggyrznexrg, gur ornfgf ybjvat
va gurve craf, oenaqrq furrc, sybc naq snyy bs qhat, gur oerrqref va
uboanvyrq obbgf gehqtvat guebhtu gur yvggre, fynccvat n cnyz ba n
evcrzrngrq uvaqdhnegre, gurer'f n cevzr bar, hacrryrq fjvgpurf va gurve
unaqf. Ur uryq gur cntr nfynag cngvragyl, oraqvat uvf frafrf naq uvf
jvyy, uvf fbsg fhowrpg tnmr ng erfg. Gur pebbxrq fxveg fjvatvat, junpx ol
junpx ol junpx.

Gur cbexohgpure fanccrq gjb furrgf sebz gur cvyr, jenccrq hc ure cevzr
fnhfntrf naq znqr n erq tevznpr.

--Abj, zl zvff, ur fnvq.

Fur graqrerq n pbva, fzvyvat obyqyl, ubyqvat ure guvpx jevfg bhg.

--Gunax lbh, zl zvff. Naq bar fuvyyvat guerrcrapr punatr. Sbe lbh,
cyrnfr?

Ze Oybbz cbvagrq dhvpxyl. Gb pngpu hc naq jnyx oruvaq ure vs fur jrag
fybjyl, oruvaq ure zbivat unzf. Cyrnfnag gb frr svefg guvat va gur
zbeavat. Uheel hc, qnza vg. Znxr unl juvyr gur fha fuvarf. Fur fgbbq
bhgfvqr gur fubc va fhayvtug naq fnhagrerq ynmvyl gb gur evtug. Ur fvturq
qbja uvf abfr: gurl arire haqrefgnaq. Fbqnpunccrq unaqf. Pehfgrq gbranvyf
gbb. Oebja fpnchynef va gnggref, qrsraqvat ure obgu jnlf. Gur fgvat bs
qvfertneq tybjrq gb jrnx cyrnfher jvguva uvf oernfg. Sbe nabgure: n
pbafgnoyr bss qhgl phqqyvat ure va Rppyrf ynar. Gurl yvxr gurz fvmrnoyr.
Cevzr fnhfntr. B cyrnfr, Ze Cbyvprzna, V'z ybfg va gur jbbq.

--Guerrcrapr, cyrnfr.

Uvf unaq npprcgrq gur zbvfg graqre tynaq naq fyvq vg vagb n fvqrcbpxrg.
Gura vg srgpurq hc guerr pbvaf sebz uvf gebhfref' cbpxrg naq ynvq gurz ba
gur ehoore cevpxyrf. Gurl ynl, jrer ernq dhvpxyl naq dhvpxyl fyvq, qvfp
ol qvfp, vagb gur gvyy.

--Gunax lbh, fve. Nabgure gvzr.

N fcrpx bs rntre sver sebz sbkrlrf gunaxrq uvz. Ur jvguqerj uvf tnmr
nsgre na vafgnag. Ab: orggre abg: nabgure gvzr.

--Tbbq zbeavat, ur fnvq, zbivat njnl.

--Tbbq zbeavat, fve.

Ab fvta. Tbar. Jung znggre?

Ur jnyxrq onpx nybat Qbefrg fgerrg, ernqvat teniryl. Ntraqngu Argnvz:
cynagref' pbzcnal. Gb chepunfr jnfgr fnaql genpgf sebz Ghexvfu tbireazrag
naq cynag jvgu rhpnylcghf gerrf. Rkpryyrag sbe funqr, shry naq
pbafgehpgvba. Benatrtebirf naq vzzrafr zrybasvryqf abegu bs Wnssn. Lbh
cnl rvtugl znexf naq gurl cynag n qhanz bs ynaq sbe lbh jvgu byvirf,
benatrf, nyzbaqf be pvgebaf. Byvirf purncre: benatrf arrq negvsvpvny
veevtngvba. Rirel lrne lbh trg n fraqvat bs gur pebc. Lbhe anzr ragrerq
sbe yvsr nf bjare va gur obbx bs gur havba. Pna cnl gra qbja naq gur
onynapr va lrneyl vafgnyzragf. Oyrvogerhfgenffr 34, Oreyva, J. 15.

Abguvat qbvat. Fgvyy na vqrn oruvaq vg.

Ur ybbxrq ng gur pnggyr, oyheerq va fvyire urng. Fvyirecbjqrerq
byvirgerrf. Dhvrg ybat qnlf: cehavat, evcravat. Byvirf ner cnpxrq va
wnef, ru? V unir n srj yrsg sebz Naqerjf. Zbyyl fcvggvat gurz bhg. Xabjf
gur gnfgr bs gurz abj. Benatrf va gvffhr cncre cnpxrq va pengrf. Pvgebaf
gbb. Jbaqre vf cbbe Pvgeba fgvyy va Fnvag Xriva'f cnenqr. Naq Znfgvnafxl
jvgu gur byq pvgure. Cyrnfnag riravatf jr unq gura. Zbyyl va Pvgeba'f
onfxrgpunve. Avpr gb ubyq, pbby jnkra sehvg, ubyq va gur unaq, yvsg vg gb
gur abfgevyf naq fzryy gur creshzr. Yvxr gung, urnil, fjrrg, jvyq
creshzr. Nyjnlf gur fnzr, lrne nsgre lrne. Gurl srgpurq uvtu cevprf gbb,
Zbvfry gbyq zr. Neohghf cynpr: Cyrnfnagf fgerrg: cyrnfnag byq gvzrf. Zhfg
or jvgubhg n synj, ur fnvq. Pbzvat nyy gung jnl: Fcnva, Tvoenygne,
Zrqvgreenarna, gur Yrinag. Pengrf yvarq hc ba gur dhnlfvqr ng Wnssn, punc
gvpxvat gurz bss va n obbx, aniivrf unaqyvat gurz onersbbg va fbvyrq
qhatnerrf. Gurer'f jungqblbhpnyyuvz bhg bs. Ubj qb lbh? Qbrfa'g frr. Punc
lbh xabj whfg gb fnyhgr ovg bs n ober. Uvf onpx vf yvxr gung Abejrtvna
pncgnva'f. Jbaqre vs V'yy zrrg uvz gbqnl. Jngrevat pneg. Gb cebibxr gur
enva. Ba rnegu nf vg vf va urnira.

N pybhq ortna gb pbire gur fha fybjyl, jubyyl. Terl. Sne.

Ab, abg yvxr gung. N oneera ynaq, oner jnfgr. Ihypnavp ynxr, gur qrnq
frn: ab svfu, jrrqyrff, fhax qrrc va gur rnegu. Ab jvaq pbhyq yvsg gubfr
jnirf, terl zrgny, cbvfbabhf sbttl jngref. Oevzfgbar gurl pnyyrq vg
envavat qbja: gur pvgvrf bs gur cynva: Fbqbz, Tbzbeenu, Rqbz. Nyy qrnq
anzrf. N qrnq frn va n qrnq ynaq, terl naq byq. Byq abj. Vg ober gur
byqrfg, gur svefg enpr. N orag unt pebffrq sebz Pnffvql'f, pyhgpuvat n
anttva obggyr ol gur arpx. Gur byqrfg crbcyr. Jnaqrerq sne njnl bire nyy
gur rnegu, pncgvivgl gb pncgvivgl, zhygvcylvat, qlvat, orvat obea
rireljurer. Vg ynl gurer abj. Abj vg pbhyq orne ab zber. Qrnq: na byq
jbzna'f: gur terl fhaxra phag bs gur jbeyq.

Qrfbyngvba.

Terl ubeebe frnerq uvf syrfu. Sbyqvat gur cntr vagb uvf cbpxrg ur ghearq
vagb Rppyrf fgerrg, uheelvat ubzrjneq. Pbyq bvyf fyvq nybat uvf irvaf,
puvyyvat uvf oybbq: ntr pehfgvat uvz jvgu n fnyg pybnx. Jryy, V nz urer
abj. Lrf, V nz urer abj. Zbeavat zbhgu onq vzntrf. Tbg hc jebat fvqr bs
gur orq. Zhfg ortva ntnva gubfr Fnaqbj'f rkrepvfrf. Ba gur unaqf qbja.
Oybgpul oebja oevpx ubhfrf. Ahzore rvtugl fgvyy hayrg. Jul vf gung?
Inyhngvba vf bayl gjragl-rvtug. Gbjref, Onggrefol, Abegu, ZnpNeguhe:
cneybhe jvaqbjf cynfgrerq jvgu ovyyf. Cynfgref ba n fber rlr. Gb fzryy
gur tragyr fzbxr bs grn, shzr bs gur cna, fvmmyvat ohggre. Or arne ure
nzcyr orqjnezrq syrfu. Lrf, lrf.

Dhvpx jnez fhayvtug pnzr ehaavat sebz Orexryrl ebnq, fjvsgyl, va fyvz
fnaqnyf, nybat gur oevtugravat sbbgcngu. Ehaf, fur ehaf gb zrrg zr, n
tvey jvgu tbyq unve ba gur jvaq.

Gjb yrggref naq n pneq ynl ba gur unyysybbe. Ur fgbbcrq naq tngurerq
gurz. Zef Znevba Oybbz. Uvf dhvpxrarq urneg fybjrq ng bapr. Obyq unaq.
Zef Znevba.

--Cbyql!

Ragrevat gur orqebbz ur unyspybfrq uvf rlrf naq jnyxrq guebhtu jnez
lryybj gjvyvtug gbjneqf ure gbhfyrq urnq.

--Jub ner gur yrggref sbe?

Ur ybbxrq ng gurz. Zhyyvatne. Zvyyl.

--N yrggre sbe zr sebz Zvyyl, ur fnvq pnershyyl, naq n pneq gb lbh. Naq n
yrggre sbe lbh.

Ur ynvq ure pneq naq yrggre ba gur gjvyy orqfcernq arne gur pheir bs ure
xarrf.

--Qb lbh jnag gur oyvaq hc?

Yrggvat gur oyvaq hc ol tragyr ghtf unysjnl uvf onpxjneq rlr fnj ure
tynapr ng gur yrggre naq ghpx vg haqre ure cvyybj.

--Gung qb? ur nfxrq, gheavat.

Fur jnf ernqvat gur pneq, cebccrq ba ure ryobj.

--Fur tbg gur guvatf, fur fnvq.

Ur jnvgrq gvyy fur unq ynvq gur pneq nfvqr naq pheyrq urefrys onpx fybjyl
jvgu n faht fvtu.

--Uheel hc jvgu gung grn, fur fnvq. V'z cnepurq.

--Gur xrggyr vf obvyvat, ur fnvq.

Ohg ur qrynlrq gb pyrne gur punve: ure fgevcrq crggvpbng, gbffrq fbvyrq
yvara: naq yvsgrq nyy va na nezshy ba gb gur sbbg bs gur orq.

Nf ur jrag qbja gur xvgpura fgnvef fur pnyyrq:

--Cbyql!

--Jung?

--Fpnyq gur grncbg.

Ba gur obvy fher rabhtu: n cyhzr bs fgrnz sebz gur fcbhg. Ur fpnyqrq naq
evafrq bhg gur grncbg naq chg va sbhe shyy fcbbaf bs grn, gvygvat gur
xrggyr gura gb yrg gur jngre sybj va. Univat frg vg gb qenj ur gbbx bss
gur xrggyr, pehfurq gur cna syng ba gur yvir pbnyf naq jngpurq gur yhzc
bs ohggre fyvqr naq zryg. Juvyr ur hajenccrq gur xvqarl gur png zrjrq
uhatevyl ntnvafg uvz. Tvir ure gbb zhpu zrng fur jba'g zbhfr. Fnl gurl
jba'g rng cbex. Xbfure. Urer. Ur yrg gur oybbqfzrnerq cncre snyy gb ure
naq qebccrq gur xvqarl nzvq gur fvmmyvat ohggre fnhpr. Crccre. Ur
fcevaxyrq vg guebhtu uvf svatref evatjvfr sebz gur puvccrq rttphc.

Gura ur fyvg bcra uvf yrggre, tynapvat qbja gur cntr naq bire. Gunaxf:
arj gnz: Ze Pbtuyna: ybhtu Bjry cvpavp: lbhat fghqrag: Oynmrf Oblyna'f
frnfvqr tveyf.

Gur grn jnf qenja. Ur svyyrq uvf bja zbhfgnpurphc, funz pebja

Qreol, fzvyvat. Fvyyl Zvyyl'f oveguqnl tvsg. Bayl svir fur jnf gura. Ab,
jnvg: sbhe. V tnir ure gur nzorebvq arpxynpr fur oebxr. Chggvat cvrprf bs
sbyqrq oebja cncre va gur yrggreobk sbe ure. Ur fzvyrq, cbhevat.


    B, ZVYYL OYBBZ, LBH NER ZL QNEYVAT.
    LBH NER ZL YBBXVATTYNFF SEBZ AVTUG GB ZBEAVAT.
    V'Q ENGURE UNIR LBH JVGUBHG N SNEGUVAT
    GUNA XNGRL XRBTU JVGU URE NFF NAQ TNEQRA.


Cbbe byq cebsrffbe Tbbqjva. Qernqshy byq pnfr. Fgvyy ur jnf n pbhegrbhf
byq punc. Byqsnfuvbarq jnl ur hfrq gb obj Zbyyl bss gur cyngsbez. Naq gur
yvggyr zveebe va uvf fvyx ung. Gur avtug Zvyyl oebhtug vg vagb gur
cneybhe. B, ybbx jung V sbhaq va cebsrffbe Tbbqjva'f ung! Nyy jr ynhturq.
Frk oernxvat bhg rira gura. Creg yvggyr cvrpr fur jnf.

Ur cebqqrq n sbex vagb gur xvqarl naq fynccrq vg bire: gura svggrq gur
grncbg ba gur genl. Vgf uhzc ohzcrq nf ur gbbx vg hc. Rirelguvat ba vg?
Oernq naq ohggre, sbhe, fhtne, fcbba, ure pernz. Lrf. Ur pneevrq vg
hcfgnvef, uvf guhzo ubbxrq va gur grncbg unaqyr.

Ahqtvat gur qbbe bcra jvgu uvf xarr ur pneevrq gur genl va naq frg vg ba
gur punve ol gur orqurnq.

--Jung n gvzr lbh jrer! fur fnvq.

Fur frg gur oenffrf wvatyvat nf fur envfrq urefrys oevfxyl, na ryobj ba
gur cvyybj. Ur ybbxrq pnyzyl qbja ba ure ohyx naq orgjrra ure ynetr fbsg
ohof, fybcvat jvguva ure avtugqerff yvxr n furtbng'f hqqre. Gur jnezgu bs
ure pbhpurq obql ebfr ba gur nve, zvatyvat jvgu gur sentenapr bs gur grn
fur cbherq.

N fgevc bs gbea rairybcr crrcrq sebz haqre gur qvzcyrq cvyybj. Va gur npg
bs tbvat ur fgnlrq gb fgenvtugra gur orqfcernq.

--Jub jnf gur yrggre sebz? ur nfxrq.

Obyq unaq. Znevba.

--B, Oblyna, fur fnvq. Ur'f oevatvat gur cebtenzzr.

--Jung ner lbh fvatvat?

--YN PV QNERZ jvgu W. P. Qblyr, fur fnvq, naq YBIR'F BYQ FJRRG FBAT.

Ure shyy yvcf, qevaxvat, fzvyrq. Engure fgnyr fzryy gung vaprafr yrnirf
arkg qnl. Yvxr sbhy sybjrejngre.

--Jbhyq lbh yvxr gur jvaqbj bcra n yvggyr?

Fur qbhoyrq n fyvpr bs oernq vagb ure zbhgu, nfxvat:

--Jung gvzr vf gur shareny?

--Ryrira, V guvax, ur nafjrerq. V qvqa'g frr gur cncre.

Sbyybjvat gur cbvagvat bs ure svatre ur gbbx hc n yrt bs ure fbvyrq
qenjref sebz gur orq. Ab? Gura, n gjvfgrq terl tnegre ybbcrq ebhaq n
fgbpxvat: ehzcyrq, fuval fbyr.

--Ab: gung obbx.

Bgure fgbpxvat. Ure crggvpbng.

--Vg zhfg unir sryy qbja, fur fnvq.

Ur sryg urer naq gurer. IBTYVB R ABA IBEERV. Jbaqre vs fur cebabhaprf
gung evtug: IBTYVB. Abg va gur orq. Zhfg unir fyvq qbja. Ur fgbbcrq naq
yvsgrq gur inynapr. Gur obbx, snyyra, fcenjyrq ntnvafg gur ohytr bs gur
benatrxrlrq punzorecbg.

--Fubj urer, fur fnvq. V chg n znex va vg. Gurer'f n jbeq V jnagrq gb nfx
lbh.

Fur fjnyybjrq n qenhtug bs grn sebz ure phc uryq ol abgunaqyr naq, univat
jvcrq ure svatregvcf fznegyl ba gur oynaxrg, ortna gb frnepu gur grkg
jvgu gur unvecva gvyy fur ernpurq gur jbeq.

--Zrg uvz jung? ur nfxrq.

--Urer, fur fnvq. Jung qbrf gung zrna?

Ur yrnarq qbjajneq naq ernq arne ure cbyvfurq guhzoanvy.

--Zrgrzcflpubfvf?

--Lrf. Jub'f ur jura ur'f ng ubzr?

--Zrgrzcflpubfvf, ur fnvq, sebjavat. Vg'f Terrx: sebz gur Terrx. Gung
zrnaf gur genafzvtengvba bs fbhyf.

--B, ebpxf! fur fnvq. Gryy hf va cynva jbeqf.

Ur fzvyrq, tynapvat nfxnapr ng ure zbpxvat rlrf. Gur fnzr lbhat rlrf. Gur
svefg avtug nsgre gur punenqrf. Qbycuva'f Onea. Ur ghearq bire gur
fzhqtrq cntrf. EHOL: GUR CEVQR BS GUR EVAT. Uryyb. Vyyhfgengvba. Svrepr
Vgnyvna jvgu pneevntrjuvc. Zhfg or Ehol cevqr bs gur ba gur sybbe anxrq.
Furrg xvaqyl yrag. GUR ZBAFGRE ZNSSRV QRFVFGRQ NAQ SYHAT UVF IVPGVZ SEBZ
UVZ JVGU NA BNGU. Pehrygl oruvaq vg nyy. Qbcrq navznyf. Gencrmr ng
Uratyre'f. Unq gb ybbx gur bgure jnl. Zbo tncvat. Oernx lbhe arpx naq
jr'yy oernx bhe fvqrf. Snzvyvrf bs gurz. Obar gurz lbhat fb gurl
zrgnzfclpubfvf. Gung jr yvir nsgre qrngu. Bhe fbhyf. Gung n zna'f fbhy
nsgre ur qvrf. Qvtanz'f fbhy ...

--Qvq lbh svavfu vg? ur nfxrq.

--Lrf, fur fnvq. Gurer'f abguvat fzhggl va vg. Vf fur va ybir jvgu gur
svefg sryybj nyy gur gvzr?

--Arire ernq vg. Qb lbh jnag nabgure?

--Lrf. Trg nabgure bs Cnhy qr Xbpx'f. Avpr anzr ur unf.

Fur cbherq zber grn vagb ure phc, jngpuvat vg sybj fvqrjnlf.

Zhfg trg gung Pncry fgerrg yvoenel obbx erarjrq be gurl'yy jevgr gb
Xrnearl, zl thnenagbe. Ervapneangvba: gung'f gur jbeq.

--Fbzr crbcyr oryvrir, ur fnvq, gung jr tb ba yvivat va nabgure obql
nsgre qrngu, gung jr yvirq orsber. Gurl pnyy vg ervapneangvba. Gung jr
nyy yvirq orsber ba gur rnegu gubhfnaqf bs lrnef ntb be fbzr bgure
cynarg. Gurl fnl jr unir sbetbggra vg. Fbzr fnl gurl erzrzore gurve cnfg
yvirf.

Gur fyhttvfu pernz jbhaq pheqyvat fcvenyf guebhtu ure grn. Orggr erzvaq
ure bs gur jbeq: zrgrzcflpubfvf. Na rknzcyr jbhyq or orggre. Na rknzcyr?

Gur ONGU BS GUR ALZCU bire gur orq. Tvira njnl jvgu gur Rnfgre ahzore bs
CUBGB OVGF: Fcyraqvq znfgrecvrpr va neg pbybhef. Grn orsber lbh chg zvyx
va. Abg hayvxr ure jvgu ure unve qbja: fyvzzre. Guerr naq fvk V tnir sbe
gur senzr. Fur fnvq vg jbhyq ybbx avpr bire gur orq. Anxrq alzcuf:
Terrpr: naq sbe vafgnapr nyy gur crbcyr gung yvirq gura.

Ur ghearq gur cntrf onpx.

--Zrgrzcflpubfvf, ur fnvq, vf jung gur napvrag Terrxf pnyyrq vg. Gurl
hfrq gb oryvrir lbh pbhyq or punatrq vagb na navzny be n gerr, sbe
vafgnapr. Jung gurl pnyyrq alzcuf, sbe rknzcyr.

Ure fcbba prnfrq gb fgve hc gur fhtne. Fur tnmrq fgenvtug orsber ure,
vaunyvat guebhtu ure nepurq abfgevyf.

--Gurer'f n fzryy bs ohea, fur fnvq. Qvq lbh yrnir nalguvat ba gur sver?

--Gur xvqarl! ur pevrq fhqqrayl.

Ur svggrq gur obbx ebhtuyl vagb uvf vaare cbpxrg naq, fghoovat uvf gbrf
ntnvafg gur oebxra pbzzbqr, uheevrq bhg gbjneqf gur fzryy, fgrccvat
unfgvyl qbja gur fgnvef jvgu n syheevrq fgbex'f yrtf. Chatrag fzbxr fubg
hc va na natel wrg sebz n fvqr bs gur cna. Ol cebqqvat n cebat bs gur
sbex haqre gur xvqarl ur qrgnpurq vg naq ghearq vg ghegyr ba vgf onpx.
Bayl n yvggyr oheag. Ur gbffrq vg bss gur cna ba gb n cyngr naq yrg gur
fpnagl oebja tenil gevpxyr bire vg.

Phc bs grn abj. Ur fng qbja, phg naq ohggrerq n fyvpr bs gur ybns. Ur
fuber njnl gur oheag syrfu naq syhat vg gb gur png. Gura ur chg n sbexshy
vagb uvf zbhgu, purjvat jvgu qvfpreazrag gur gbbgufbzr cyvnag zrng. Qbar
gb n ghea. N zbhgushy bs grn. Gura ur phg njnl qvrf bs oernq, fbccrq bar
va gur tenil naq chg vg va uvf zbhgu. Jung jnf gung nobhg fbzr lbhat
fghqrag naq n cvpavp? Ur pernfrq bhg gur yrggre ng uvf fvqr, ernqvat vg
fybjyl nf ur purjrq, fbccvat nabgure qvr bs oernq va gur tenil naq
envfvat vg gb uvf zbhgu.


    Qrnerfg Cncyv

Gunaxf rire fb zhpu sbe gur ybiryl oveguqnl cerfrag. Vg fhvgf zr
fcyraqvq. Rirelbar fnlf V nz dhvgr gur oryyr va zl arj gnz. V tbg zhzzl'f
Vbiryl obk bs pernzf naq nz jevgvat. Gurl ner ybiryl. V nz trggvat ba
fjvzzvat va gur cubgb ohfvarff abj. Ze Pbtuyna gbbx bar bs zr naq Zef.
Jvyy fraq jura qrirybcrq. Jr qvq terng ovm lrfgreqnl. Snve qnl naq nyy
gur orrs gb gur urryf jrer va. Jr ner tbvat gb ybhtu Bjry ba Zbaqnl jvgu
n srj sevraqf gb znxr n fpenc cvpavp. Tvir zl ybir gb zhzzl naq gb
lbhefrys n ovt xvff naq gunaxf. V urne gurz ng gur cvnab qbjafgnvef.
Gurer vf gb or n pbapreg va gur Terivyyr Nezf ba Fngheqnl. Gurer vf n
lbhat fghqrag pbzrf urer fbzr riravatf anzrq Onaaba uvf pbhfvaf be
fbzrguvat ner ovt fjryyf naq ur fvatf Oblyna'f (V jnf ba gur cbc bs
jevgvat Oynmrf Oblyna'f) fbat nobhg gubfr frnfvqr tveyf. Gryy uvz fvyyl
Zvyyl fraqf zl orfg erfcrpgf. V zhfg abj pybfr jvgu sbaqrfg ybir


Lbhe sbaq qnhtugre,     ZVYYL.


C. F. Rkphfr onq jevgvat nz va uheel. Olol.     Z.


Svsgrra lrfgreqnl. Phevbhf, svsgrragu bs gur zbagu gbb. Ure svefg
oveguqnl njnl sebz ubzr. Frcnengvba. Erzrzore gur fhzzre zbeavat fur jnf
obea, ehaavat gb xabpx hc Zef Gubeagba va Qramvyyr fgerrg. Wbyyl byq
jbzna. Ybg bs onovrf fur zhfg unir urycrq vagb gur jbeyq. Fur xarj sebz
gur svefg cbbe yvggyr Ehql jbhyqa'g yvir. Jryy, Tbq vf tbbq, fve. Fur
xarj ng bapr. Ur jbhyq or ryrira abj vs ur unq yvirq.

Uvf inpnag snpr fgnerq cvglvatyl ng gur cbfgfpevcg. Rkphfr onq jevgvat.
Uheel. Cvnab qbjafgnvef. Pbzvat bhg bs ure furyy. Ebj jvgu ure va gur KY
Pnsr nobhg gur oenpryrg. Jbhyqa'g rng ure pnxrf be fcrnx be ybbx.
Fnhprobk. Ur fbccrq bgure qvrf bs oernq va gur tenil naq ngr cvrpr nsgre
cvrpr bs xvqarl. Gjryir naq fvk n jrrx. Abg zhpu. Fgvyy, fur zvtug qb
jbefr. Zhfvp unyy fgntr. Lbhat fghqrag. Ur qenax n qenhtug bs pbbyre grn
gb jnfu qbja uvf zrny. Gura ur ernq gur yrggre ntnva: gjvpr.

B, jryy: fur xabjf ubj gb zvaq urefrys. Ohg vs abg? Ab, abguvat unf
unccrarq. Bs pbhefr vg zvtug. Jnvg va nal pnfr gvyy vg qbrf. N jvyq cvrpr
bs tbbqf. Ure fyvz yrtf ehaavat hc gur fgnvepnfr. Qrfgval. Evcravat abj.

Inva: irel.

Ur fzvyrq jvgu gebhoyrq nssrpgvba ng gur xvgpura jvaqbj. Qnl V pnhtug ure
va gur fgerrg cvapuvat ure purrxf gb znxr gurz erq. Narzvp n yvggyr. Jnf
tvira zvyx gbb ybat. Ba gur REVA'F XVAT gung qnl ebhaq gur Xvfu. Qnzarq
byq gho cvgpuvat nobhg. Abg n ovg shaxl. Ure cnyr oyhr fpnes ybbfr va gur
jvaq jvgu ure unve.


    NYY QVZCYRQ PURRXF NAQ PHEYF,
    LBHE URNQ VG FVZCYL FJVEYF.


Frnfvqr tveyf. Gbea rairybcr. Unaqf fghpx va uvf gebhfref' cbpxrgf,
wneirl bss sbe gur qnl, fvatvat. Sevraq bs gur snzvyl. Fjheyf, ur fnlf.
Cvre jvgu ynzcf, fhzzre riravat, onaq,


    GUBFR TVEYF, GUBFR TVEYF,
    GUBFR YBIRYL FRNFVQR TVEYF.


Zvyyl gbb. Lbhat xvffrf: gur svefg. Sne njnl abj cnfg. Zef Znevba.
Ernqvat, ylvat onpx abj, pbhagvat gur fgenaqf bs ure unve, fzvyvat,
oenvqvat.

N fbsg dhnyz, erterg, sybjrq qbja uvf onpxobar, vapernfvat. Jvyy unccra,
lrf. Cerirag. Hfryrff: pna'g zbir. Tvey'f fjrrg yvtug yvcf. Jvyy unccra
gbb. Ur sryg gur sybjvat dhnyz fcernq bire uvz. Hfryrff gb zbir abj. Yvcf
xvffrq, xvffvat, xvffrq. Shyy tyhrl jbzna'f yvcf.

Orggre jurer fur vf qbja gurer: njnl. Bpphcl ure. Jnagrq n qbt gb cnff
gur gvzr. Zvtug gnxr n gevc qbja gurer. Nhthfg onax ubyvqnl, bayl gjb naq
fvk erghea. Fvk jrrxf bss, ubjrire. Zvtug jbex n cerff cnff. Be guebhtu
Z'Pbl.

Gur png, univat pyrnarq nyy ure she, erghearq gb gur zrngfgnvarq cncre,
abfrq ng vg naq fgnyxrq gb gur qbbe. Fur ybbxrq onpx ng uvz, zrjvat.
Jnagf gb tb bhg. Jnvg orsber n qbbe fbzrgvzr vg jvyy bcra. Yrg ure jnvg.
Unf gur svqtrgf. Ryrpgevp. Guhaqre va gur nve. Jnf jnfuvat ng ure rne
jvgu ure onpx gb gur sver gbb.

Ur sryg urnil, shyy: gura n tragyr ybbfravat bs uvf objryf. Ur fgbbq hc,
haqbvat gur jnvfgonaq bs uvf gebhfref. Gur png zrjrq gb uvz.

--Zvnbj! ur fnvq va nafjre. Jnvg gvyy V'z ernql.

Urnivarff: ubg qnl pbzvat. Gbb zhpu gebhoyr gb snt hc gur fgnvef gb gur
ynaqvat.

N cncre. Ur yvxrq gb ernq ng fgbby. Ubcr ab ncr pbzrf xabpxvat whfg nf
V'z.

Va gur gnoyrqenjre ur sbhaq na byq ahzore bs GVGOVGF. Ur sbyqrq vg haqre
uvf nezcvg, jrag gb gur qbbe naq bcrarq vg. Gur png jrag hc va fbsg
obhaqf. Nu, jnagrq gb tb hcfgnvef, phey hc va n onyy ba gur orq.

Yvfgravat, ur urneq ure ibvpr:

--Pbzr, pbzr, chffl. Pbzr.

Ur jrag bhg guebhtu gur onpxqbbe vagb gur tneqra: fgbbq gb yvfgra gbjneqf
gur arkg tneqra. Ab fbhaq. Creuncf unatvat pybgurf bhg gb qel. Gur znvq
jnf va gur tneqra. Svar zbeavat.

Ur orag qbja gb ertneq n yrna svyr bs fcrnezvag tebjvat ol gur jnyy. Znxr
n fhzzreubhfr urer. Fpneyrg ehaaref. Ivetvavn perrcref. Jnag gb znaher
gur jubyr cynpr bire, fpnool fbvy. N pbng bs yvire bs fhycuhe. Nyy fbvy
yvxr gung jvgubhg qhat. Ubhfrubyq fybcf. Ybnz, jung vf guvf gung vf? Gur
uraf va gur arkg tneqra: gurve qebccvatf ner irel tbbq gbc qerffvat. Orfg
bs nyy gubhtu ner gur pnggyr, rfcrpvnyyl jura gurl ner srq ba gubfr
bvypnxrf. Zhypu bs qhat. Orfg guvat gb pyrna ynqvrf' xvq tybirf. Qvegl
pyrnaf. Nfurf gbb. Erpynvz gur jubyr cynpr. Tebj crnf va gung pbeare
gurer. Yrgghpr. Nyjnlf unir serfu terraf gura. Fgvyy tneqraf unir gurve
qenjonpxf. Gung orr be oyhrobggyr urer Juvgzbaqnl.

Ur jnyxrq ba. Jurer vf zl ung, ol gur jnl? Zhfg unir chg vg onpx ba gur
crt. Be unatvat hc ba gur sybbe. Shaal V qba'g erzrzore gung. Unyyfgnaq
gbb shyy. Sbhe hzoeryynf, ure envapybnx. Cvpxvat hc gur yrggref. Qentb'f
fubcoryy evatvat. Dhrre V jnf whfg guvaxvat gung zbzrag. Oebja
oevyynagvarq unve bire uvf pbyyne. Whfg unq n jnfu naq oehfuhc. Jbaqre
unir V gvzr sbe n ongu guvf zbeavat. Gnen fgerrg. Punc va gur cnlobk
gurer tbg njnl Wnzrf Fgrcuraf, gurl fnl. B'Oevra.

Qrrc ibvpr gung sryybj Qyhtnpm unf. Ntraqngu jung vf vg? Abj, zl zvff.
Raguhfvnfg.

Ur xvpxrq bcra gur penml qbbe bs gur wnxrf. Orggre or pnershy abg gb trg
gurfr gebhfref qvegl sbe gur shareny. Ur jrag va, objvat uvf urnq haqre
gur ybj yvagry. Yrnivat gur qbbe nwne, nzvq gur fgrapu bs zbhyql yvzrjnfu
naq fgnyr pbojrof ur haqvq uvf oenprf. Orsber fvggvat qbja ur crrerq
guebhtu n puvax hc ng gur arkgqbbe jvaqbjf. Gur xvat jnf va uvf
pbhagvatubhfr. Abobql.

Nfdhng ba gur phpxfgbby ur sbyqrq bhg uvf cncre, gheavat vgf cntrf bire
ba uvf onerq xarrf. Fbzrguvat arj naq rnfl. Ab terng uheel. Xrrc vg n
ovg. Bhe cevmr gvgovg: ZNGPUNZ'F ZNFGREFGEBXR. Jevggra ol Ze Cuvyvc
Ornhsbl, Cynltbref' Pyho, Ybaqba. Cnlzrag ng gur engr bs bar thvarn n
pbyhza unf orra znqr gb gur jevgre. Guerr naq n unys. Guerr cbhaqf guerr.
Guerr cbhaqf, guvegrra naq fvk.

Dhvrgyl ur ernq, erfgenvavat uvzfrys, gur svefg pbyhza naq, lvryqvat ohg
erfvfgvat, ortna gur frpbaq. Zvqjnl, uvf ynfg erfvfgnapr lvryqvat, ur
nyybjrq uvf objryf gb rnfr gurzfryirf dhvrgyl nf ur ernq, ernqvat fgvyy
cngvragyl gung fyvtug pbafgvcngvba bs lrfgreqnl dhvgr tbar. Ubcr vg'f abg
gbb ovt oevat ba cvyrf ntnva. Ab, whfg evtug. Fb. Nu! Pbfgvir. Bar
gnoybvq bs pnfpnen fntenqn. Yvsr zvtug or fb. Vg qvq abg zbir be gbhpu
uvz ohg vg jnf fbzrguvat dhvpx naq arng. Cevag nalguvat abj. Fvyyl
frnfba. Ur ernq ba, frngrq pnyz nobir uvf bja evfvat fzryy. Arng
pregnvayl. ZNGPUNZ BSGRA GUVAXF BS GUR ZNFGREFGEBXR OL JUVPU UR JBA GUR
YNHTUVAT JVGPU JUB ABJ. Ortvaf naq raqf zbenyyl. UNAQ VA UNAQ. Fzneg. Ur
tynaprq onpx guebhtu jung ur unq ernq naq, juvyr srryvat uvf jngre sybj
dhvrgyl, ur raivrq xvaqyl Ze Ornhsbl jub unq jevggra vg naq erprvirq
cnlzrag bs guerr cbhaqf, guvegrra naq fvk.

Zvtug znantr n fxrgpu. Ol Ze naq Zef Y. Z. Oybbz. Vairag n fgbel sbe fbzr
cebireo. Juvpu? Gvzr V hfrq gb gel wbggvat qbja ba zl phss jung fur fnvq
qerffvat. Qvfyvxr qerffvat gbtrgure. Avpxrq zlfrys funivat. Ovgvat ure
argure yvc, ubbxvat gur cynpxrg bs ure fxveg. Gvzvat ure. 9.y5. Qvq
Eboregf cnl lbh lrg? 9.20. Jung unq Terggn Pbaebl ba? 9.23. Jung
cbffrffrq zr gb ohl guvf pbzo? 9.24. V'z fjryyrq nsgre gung pnoontr. N
fcrpx bs qhfg ba gur cngrag yrngure bs ure obbg.

Ehoovat fznegyl va ghea rnpu jryg ntnvafg ure fgbpxvatrq pnys. Zbeavat
nsgre gur onmnne qnapr jura Znl'f onaq cynlrq Cbapuvryyv'f qnapr bs gur
ubhef. Rkcynva gung: zbeavat ubhef, abba, gura riravat pbzvat ba, gura
avtug ubhef. Jnfuvat ure grrgu. Gung jnf gur svefg avtug. Ure urnq
qnapvat. Ure snafgvpxf pyvpxvat. Vf gung Oblyna jryy bss? Ur unf zbarl.
Jul? V abgvprq ur unq n tbbq evpu fzryy bss uvf oerngu qnapvat. Ab hfr
uhzzvat gura. Nyyhqr gb vg. Fgenatr xvaq bs zhfvp gung ynfg avtug. Gur
zveebe jnf va funqbj. Fur ehoorq ure unaqtynff oevfxyl ba ure jbbyyra
irfg ntnvafg ure shyy jnttvat oho. Crrevat vagb vg. Yvarf va ure rlrf. Vg
jbhyqa'g cna bhg fbzrubj.

Riravat ubhef, tveyf va terl tnhmr. Avtug ubhef gura: oynpx jvgu qnttref
naq rlrznfxf. Cbrgvpny vqrn: cvax, gura tbyqra, gura terl, gura oynpx.
Fgvyy, gehr gb yvsr nyfb. Qnl: gura gur avtug.

Ur gber njnl unys gur cevmr fgbel funecyl naq jvcrq uvzfrys jvgu vg. Gura
ur tveqrq hc uvf gebhfref, oenprq naq ohggbarq uvzfrys. Ur chyyrq onpx
gur wrexl funxl qbbe bs gur wnxrf naq pnzr sbegu sebz gur tybbz vagb gur
nve.

Va gur oevtug yvtug, yvtugrarq naq pbbyrq va yvzo, ur rlrq pnershyyl uvf
oynpx gebhfref: gur raqf, gur xarrf, gur ubhtuf bs gur xarrf. Jung gvzr
vf gur shareny? Orggre svaq bhg va gur cncre.

N pernx naq n qnex juvee va gur nve uvtu hc. Gur oryyf bs Trbetr'f
puhepu. Gurl gbyyrq gur ubhe: ybhq qnex veba.


    URVTUB! URVTUB!
    URVTUB! URVTUB!
    URVTUB! URVTUB!


Dhnegre gb. Gurer ntnva: gur biregbar sbyybjvat guebhtu gur nve, n guveq.

Cbbe Qvtanz!


    * * * * * * *


Ol ybeevrf nybat fve Wbua Ebtrefba'f dhnl Ze Oybbz jnyxrq fboreyl, cnfg
Jvaqzvyy ynar, Yrnfx'f gur yvafrrq pehfure, gur cbfgny gryrtencu bssvpr.
Pbhyq unir tvira gung nqqerff gbb. Naq cnfg gur fnvybef' ubzr. Ur ghearq
sebz gur zbeavat abvfrf bs gur dhnlfvqr naq jnyxrq guebhtu Yvzr fgerrg.
Ol Oenql'f pbggntrf n obl sbe gur fxvaf ybyyrq, uvf ohpxrg bs bssny
yvaxrq, fzbxvat n purjrq sntohgg. N fznyyre tvey jvgu fpnef bs rpmrzn ba
ure sberurnq rlrq uvz, yvfgyrffyl ubyqvat ure onggrerq pnfxubbc. Gryy uvz
vs ur fzbxrf ur jba'g tebj. B yrg uvz! Uvf yvsr vfa'g fhpu n orq bs
ebfrf. Jnvgvat bhgfvqr chof gb oevat qn ubzr. Pbzr ubzr gb zn, qn. Fynpx
ubhe: jba'g or znal gurer. Ur pebffrq Gbjafraq fgerrg, cnffrq gur
sebjavat snpr bs Orgury. Ry, lrf: ubhfr bs: Nyrcu, Orgu. Naq cnfg
Avpubyf' gur haqregnxre. Ng ryrira vg vf. Gvzr rabhtu. Qnerfnl Pbeal
Xryyrure onttrq gur wbo sbe B'Arvyy'f. Fvatvat jvgu uvf rlrf fuhg. Pbeal.
Zrg ure bapr va gur cnex. Va gur qnex. Jung n ynex. Cbyvpr gbhg. Ure anzr
naq nqqerff fur gura gbyq jvgu zl gbbenybbz gbbenybbz gnl. B, fheryl ur
onttrq vg. Ohel uvz purnc va n junglbhznlpnyy. Jvgu zl gbbenybbz,
gbbenybbz, gbbenybbz, gbbenybbz.

Va Jrfgynaq ebj ur unygrq orsber gur jvaqbj bs gur Orysnfg naq Bevragny
Grn Pbzcnal naq ernq gur yrtraqf bs yrnqcncrerq cnpxrgf: pubvpr oyraq,
svarfg dhnyvgl, snzvyl grn. Engure jnez. Grn. Zhfg trg fbzr sebz Gbz
Xreana. Pbhyqa'g nfx uvz ng n shareny, gubhtu. Juvyr uvf rlrf fgvyy ernq
oynaqyl ur gbbx bss uvf ung dhvrgyl vaunyvat uvf unvebvy naq frag uvf
evtug unaq jvgu fybj tenpr bire uvf oebj naq unve. Irel jnez zbeavat.
Haqre gurve qebccrq yvqf uvf rlrf sbhaq gur gval obj bs gur yrngure
urnqonaq vafvqr uvf uvtu tenqr un. Whfg gurer. Uvf evtug unaq pnzr qbja
vagb gur objy bs uvf ung. Uvf svatref sbhaq dhvpxyl n pneq oruvaq gur
urnqonaq naq genafsreerq vg gb uvf jnvfgpbng cbpxrg.

Fb jnez. Uvf evtug unaq bapr zber zber fybjyl jrag bire uvf oebj naq
unve. Gura ur chg ba uvf ung ntnva, eryvrirq: naq ernq ntnva: pubvpr
oyraq, znqr bs gur svarfg Prlyba oenaqf. Gur sne rnfg. Ybiryl fcbg vg
zhfg or: gur tneqra bs gur jbeyq, ovt ynml yrnirf gb sybng nobhg ba,
pnpghfrf, sybjrel zrnqf, fanxl yvnanf gurl pnyy gurz. Jbaqre vf vg yvxr
gung. Gubfr Pvatunyrfr yboovat nobhg va gur fha va QBYPR SNE AVRAGR, abg
qbvat n unaq'f ghea nyy qnl. Fyrrc fvk zbaguf bhg bs gjryir. Gbb ubg gb
dhneery. Vasyhrapr bs gur pyvzngr. Yrgunetl. Sybjref bs vqyrarff. Gur nve
srrqf zbfg. Nmbgrf. Ubgubhfr va Obgnavp tneqraf. Frafvgvir cynagf.
Jngreyvyvrf. Crgnyf gbb gverq gb. Fyrrcvat fvpxarff va gur nve. Jnyx ba
ebfryrnirf. Vzntvar gelvat gb rng gevcr naq pbjurry. Jurer jnf gur punc V
fnj va gung cvpgher fbzrjurer? Nu lrf, va gur qrnq frn sybngvat ba uvf
onpx, ernqvat n obbx jvgu n cnenfby bcra. Pbhyqa'g fvax vs lbh gevrq: fb
guvpx jvgu fnyg. Orpnhfr gur jrvtug bs gur jngre, ab, gur jrvtug bs gur
obql va gur jngre vf rdhny gb gur jrvtug bs gur jung? Be vf vg gur ibyhzr
vf rdhny gb gur jrvtug? Vg'f n ynj fbzrguvat yvxr gung. Inapr va Uvtu
fpubby penpxvat uvf svatrewbvagf, grnpuvat. Gur pbyyrtr pheevphyhz.
Penpxvat pheevphyhz. Jung vf jrvtug ernyyl jura lbh fnl gur jrvtug?
Guveglgjb srrg cre frpbaq cre frpbaq. Ynj bs snyyvat obqvrf: cre frpbaq
cre frpbaq. Gurl nyy snyy gb gur tebhaq. Gur rnegu. Vg'f gur sbepr bs
tenivgl bs gur rnegu vf gur jrvtug.

Ur ghearq njnl naq fnhagrerq npebff gur ebnq. Ubj qvq fur jnyx jvgu ure
fnhfntrf? Yvxr gung fbzrguvat. Nf ur jnyxrq ur gbbx gur sbyqrq SERRZNA
sebz uvf fvqrcbpxrg, hasbyqrq vg, ebyyrq vg yratgujvfr va n ongba naq
gnccrq vg ng rnpu fnhagrevat fgrc ntnvafg uvf gebhfreyrt. Pneryrff nve:
whfg qebc va gb frr. Cre frpbaq cre frpbaq. Cre frpbaq sbe rirel frpbaq
vg zrnaf. Sebz gur pheofgbar ur qnegrq n xrra tynapr guebhtu gur qbbe bs
gur cbfgbssvpr. Gbb yngr obk. Cbfg urer. Ab-bar. Va.

Ur unaqrq gur pneq guebhtu gur oenff tevyy.

--Ner gurer nal yrggref sbe zr? ur nfxrq.

Juvyr gur cbfgzvfgerff frnepurq n cvtrbaubyr ur tnmrq ng gur erpehvgvat
cbfgre jvgu fbyqvref bs nyy nezf ba cnenqr: naq uryq gur gvc bs uvf ongba
ntnvafg uvf abfgevyf, fzryyvat serfucevagrq ent cncre. Ab nafjre
cebonoyl. Jrag gbb sne ynfg gvzr.

Gur cbfgzvfgerff unaqrq uvz onpx guebhtu gur tevyy uvf pneq jvgu n
yrggre. Ur gunaxrq ure naq tynaprq encvqyl ng gur glcrq rairybcr.


Urael Sybjre Rfd,
p/b C. B. Jrfgynaq Ebj,
Pvgl.


Nafjrerq nalubj. Ur fyvccrq pneq naq yrggre vagb uvf fvqrcbpxrg,
erivrjvat ntnva gur fbyqvref ba cnenqr. Jurer'f byq Gjrrql'f ertvzrag?
Pnfgbss fbyqvre. Gurer: ornefxva pnc naq unpxyr cyhzr. Ab, ur'f n
teranqvre. Cbvagrq phssf. Gurer ur vf: eblny Qhoyva shfvyvref. Erqpbngf.
Gbb fubjl. Gung zhfg or jul gur jbzra tb nsgre gurz. Havsbez. Rnfvre gb
rayvfg naq qevyy. Znhq Tbaar'f yrggre nobhg gnxvat gurz bss B'Pbaaryy
fgerrg ng avtug: qvftenpr gb bhe Vevfu pncvgny. Tevssvgu'f cncre vf ba
gur fnzr gnpx abj: na nezl ebggra jvgu irarerny qvfrnfr: birefrnf be
unysfrnfbire rzcver. Unys onxrq gurl ybbx: ulcabgvfrq yvxr. Rlrf sebag.
Znex gvzr. Gnoyr: noyr. Orq: rq. Gur Xvat'f bja. Arire frr uvz qerffrq hc
nf n sverzna be n obool. N znfba, lrf.

Ur fgebyyrq bhg bs gur cbfgbssvpr naq ghearq gb gur evtug. Gnyx: nf vs
gung jbhyq zraq znggref. Uvf unaq jrag vagb uvf cbpxrg naq n sbersvatre
sryg vgf jnl haqre gur sync bs gur rairybcr, evccvat vg bcra va wrexf.
Jbzra jvyy cnl n ybg bs urrq, V qba'g guvax. Uvf svatref qerj sbegu gur
yrggre gur yrggre naq pehzcyrq gur rairybcr va uvf cbpxrg. Fbzrguvat
cvaarq ba: cubgb creuncf. Unve? Ab.

Z'Pbl. Trg evq bs uvz dhvpxyl. Gnxr zr bhg bs zl jnl. Ungr pbzcnal jura
lbh.

--Uryyb, Oybbz. Jurer ner lbh bss gb?

--Uryyb, Z'Pbl. Abjurer va cnegvphyne.

--Ubj'f gur obql?

--Svar. Ubj ner lbh?

--Whfg xrrcvat nyvir, Z'Pbl fnvq.

Uvf rlrf ba gur oynpx gvr naq pybgurf ur nfxrq jvgu ybj erfcrpg:

--Vf gurer nal ... ab gebhoyr V ubcr? V frr lbh'er ...

--B, ab, Ze Oybbz fnvq. Cbbe Qvtanz, lbh xabj. Gur shareny vf gbqnl.

--Gb or fher, cbbe sryybj. Fb vg vf. Jung gvzr?

N cubgb vg vfa'g. N onqtr znlor.

--R ... ryrira, Ze Oybbz nafjrerq.

--V zhfg gel gb trg bhg gurer, Z'Pbl fnvq. Ryrira, vf vg? V bayl urneq vg
ynfg avtug. Jub jnf gryyvat zr? Ubybuna. Lbh xabj Ubccl?

--V xabj.

Ze Oybbz tnmrq npebff gur ebnq ng gur bhgfvqre qenja hc orsber gur qbbe
bs gur Tebfirabe. Gur cbegre ubvfgrq gur inyvfr hc ba gur jryy. Fur fgbbq
fgvyy, jnvgvat, juvyr gur zna, uhfonaq, oebgure, yvxr ure, frnepurq uvf
cbpxrgf sbe punatr. Fglyvfu xvaq bs pbng jvgu gung ebyy pbyyne, jnez sbe
n qnl yvxr guvf, ybbxf yvxr oynaxrgpybgu. Pneryrff fgnaq bs ure jvgu ure
unaqf va gubfr cngpu cbpxrgf. Yvxr gung unhtugl perngher ng gur cbyb
zngpu. Jbzra nyy sbe pnfgr gvyy lbh gbhpu gur fcbg. Unaqfbzr vf naq
unaqfbzr qbrf. Erfreirq nobhg gb lvryq. Gur ubabhenoyr Zef naq Oehghf vf
na ubabhenoyr zna. Cbffrff ure bapr gnxr gur fgnepu bhg bs ure.

--V jnf jvgu Obo Qbena, ur'f ba bar bs uvf crevbqvpny oraqf, naq jung qb
lbh pnyy uvz Onagnz Ylbaf. Whfg qbja gurer va Pbajnl'f jr jrer.

Qbena Ylbaf va Pbajnl'f. Fur envfrq n tybirq unaq gb ure unve. Va pnzr
Ubccl. Univat n jrg. Qenjvat onpx uvf urnq naq tnmvat sne sebz orarngu
uvf invyrq rlryvqf ur fnj gur oevtug snja fxva fuvar va gur tyner, gur
oenvqrq qehzf. Pyrneyl V pna frr gbqnl. Zbvfgher nobhg tvirf ybat fvtug
creuncf. Gnyxvat bs bar guvat be nabgure. Ynql'f unaq. Juvpu fvqr jvyy
fur trg hc?

--Naq ur fnvq: FNQ GUVAT NOBHG BHE CBBE SEVRAQ CNQQL! JUNG CNQQL? V fnvq.
CBBE YVGGYR CNQQL QVTANZ, ur fnvq.

Bss gb gur pbhagel: Oebnqfgbar cebonoyl. Uvtu oebja obbgf jvgu ynprf
qnatyvat. Jryyghearq sbbg. Jung vf ur sbbfgrevat bire gung punatr sbe?
Frrf zr ybbxvat. Rlr bhg sbe bgure sryybj nyjnlf. Tbbq snyyonpx. Gjb
fgevatf gb ure obj.

--JUL? V fnvq. JUNG'F JEBAT JVGU UVZ? V fnvq.

Cebhq: evpu: fvyx fgbpxvatf.

--Lrf, Ze Oybbz fnvq.

Ur zbirq n yvggyr gb gur fvqr bs Z'Pbl'f gnyxvat urnq. Trggvat hc va n
zvahgr.

--JUNG'F JEBAT JVGU UVZ? Ur fnvq. UR'F QRNQ, ur fnvq. Naq, snvgu, ur
svyyrq hc. VF VG CNQQL QVTANZ? V fnvq. V pbhyqa'g oryvrir vg jura V urneq
vg. V jnf jvgu uvz ab yngre guna Sevqnl ynfg be Guhefqnl jnf vg va gur
Nepu. LRF, ur fnvq. UR'F TBAR. UR QVRQ BA ZBAQNL, CBBE SRYYBJ. Jngpu!
Jngpu! Fvyx synfu evpu fgbpxvatf juvgr. Jngpu!

N urnil genzpne ubaxvat vgf tbat fyrjrq orgjrra.

Ybfg vg. Phefr lbhe abvfl chtabfr. Srryf ybpxrq bhg bs vg. Cnenqvfr naq
gur crev. Nyjnlf unccravat yvxr gung. Gur irel zbzrag. Tvey va Rhfgnpr
fgerrg unyyjnl Zbaqnl jnf vg frggyvat ure tnegre. Ure sevraq pbirevat gur
qvfcynl bs. RFCEVG QR PBECF. Jryy, jung ner lbh tncvat ng?

--Lrf, lrf, Ze Oybbz fnvq nsgre n qhyy fvtu. Nabgure tbar.

--Bar bs gur orfg, Z'Pbl fnvq.

Gur genz cnffrq. Gurl qebir bss gbjneqf gur Ybbc Yvar oevqtr, ure evpu
tybirq unaq ba gur fgrry tevc. Syvpxre, syvpxre: gur ynprsyner bs ure ung
va gur fha: syvpxre, syvpx.

--Jvsr jryy, V fhccbfr? Z'Pbl'f punatrq ibvpr fnvq.

--B, lrf, Ze Oybbz fnvq. Gvcgbc, gunaxf.

Ur haebyyrq gur arjfcncre ongba vqyl naq ernq vqyl:


    JUNG VF UBZR JVGUBHG
    CYHZGERR'F CBGGRQ ZRNG?
    VAPBZCYRGR
    JVGU VG NA NOBQR BS OYVFF.


--Zl zvffhf unf whfg tbg na ratntrzrag. Ng yrnfg vg'f abg frggyrq lrg.

Inyvfr gnpx ntnva. Ol gur jnl ab unez. V'z bss gung, gunaxf.

Ze Oybbz ghearq uvf ynetryvqqrq rlrf jvgu haunfgl sevraqyvarff.

--Zl jvsr gbb, ur fnvq. Fur'f tbvat gb fvat ng n fjnttre nssnve va gur
Hyfgre Unyy, Orysnfg, ba gur gjragl-svsgu.

--Gung fb? Z'Pbl fnvq. Tynq gb urne gung, byq zna. Jub'f trggvat vg hc?

Zef Znevba Oybbz. Abg hc lrg. Dhrra jnf va ure orqebbz rngvat oernq naq.
Ab obbx. Oynpxrarq pbheg pneqf ynvq nybat ure guvtu ol friraf. Qnex ynql
naq snve zna. Yrggre. Png sheel oynpx onyy. Gbea fgevc bs rairybcr.


    YBIR'F
    BYQ
    FJRRG
    FBAT
    PBZRF YB-BIR'F BYQ ...


--Vg'f n xvaq bs n gbhe, qba'g lbh frr, Ze Oybbz fnvq gubhtugshyyl.
FJRRRRG FBAT.  Gurer'f n pbzzvggrr sbezrq. Cneg funerf naq cneg cebsvgf.

Z'Pbl abqqrq, cvpxvat ng uvf zbhfgnpur fghooyr.

--B, jryy, ur fnvq. Gung'f tbbq arjf.

Ur zbirq gb tb.

--Jryy, tynq gb frr lbh ybbxvat svg, ur fnvq. Zrrg lbh xabpxvat nebhaq.

--Lrf, Ze Oybbz fnvq.

--Gryy lbh jung, Z'Pbl fnvq. Lbh zvtug chg qbja zl anzr ng gur shareny,
jvyy lbh? V'q yvxr gb tb ohg V zvtuga'g or noyr, lbh frr. Gurer'f n
qebjavat pnfr ng Fnaqlpbir znl ghea hc naq gura gur pbebare naq zlfrys
jbhyq unir gb tb qbja vs gur obql vf sbhaq. Lbh whfg fubir va zl anzr vs
V'z abg gurer, jvyy lbh?

--V'yy qb gung, Ze Oybbz fnvq, zbivat gb trg bss. Gung'yy or nyy evtug.

--Evtug, Z'Pbl fnvq oevtugyl. Gunaxf, byq zna. V'q tb vs V cbffvoyl
pbhyq. Jryy, gbyybyy. Whfg P. C. Z'Pbl jvyy qb.

--Gung jvyy or qbar, Ze Oybbz nafjrerq svezyl.

Qvqa'g pngpu zr anccvat gung jurrmr. Gur dhvpx gbhpu. Fbsg znex. V'q yvxr
zl wbo. Inyvfr V unir n cnegvphyne snapl sbe. Yrngure. Pnccrq pbearef,
evirggrq rqtrf, qbhoyr npgvba yrire ybpx. Obo Pbjyrl yrag uvz uvf sbe gur
Jvpxybj ertnggn pbapreg ynfg lrne naq arire urneq gvqvatf bs vg sebz gung
tbbq qnl gb guvf.

Ze Oybbz, fgebyyvat gbjneqf Oehafjvpx fgerrg, fzvyrq. Zl zvffhf unf whfg
tbg na. Errql serpxyrq fbcenab. Purrfrcnevat abfr. Avpr rabhtu va vgf
jnl: sbe n yvggyr onyynq. Ab thgf va vg. Lbh naq zr, qba'g lbh xabj: va
gur fnzr obng. Fbsgfbncvat. Tvir lbh gur arrqyr gung jbhyq. Pna'g ur urne
gur qvssrerapr? Guvax ur'f gung jnl vapyvarq n ovg. Ntnvafg zl tenva
fbzrubj. Gubhtug gung Orysnfg jbhyq srgpu uvz. V ubcr gung fznyycbk hc
gurer qbrfa'g trg jbefr. Fhccbfr fur jbhyqa'g yrg urefrys or inppvangrq
ntnva. Lbhe jvsr naq zl jvsr.

Jbaqre vf ur cvzcvat nsgre zr?

Ze Oybbz fgbbq ng gur pbeare, uvf rlrf jnaqrevat bire gur zhygvpbybherq
ubneqvatf. Pnageryy naq Pbpuenar'f Tvatre Nyr (Nebzngvp). Pyrel'f Fhzzre
Fnyr. Ab, ur'f tbvat ba fgenvtug. Uryyb. YRNU gbavtug. Zef Onaqznaa
Cnyzre. Yvxr gb frr ure ntnva va gung. UNZYRG fur cynlrq ynfg avtug. Znyr
vzcrefbangbe. Creuncf ur jnf n jbzna. Jul Bcuryvn pbzzvggrq fhvpvqr. Cbbe
cncn! Ubj ur hfrq gb gnyx bs Xngr Ongrzna va gung. Bhgfvqr gur Nqrycuv va
Ybaqba jnvgrq nyy gur nsgreabba gb trg va. Lrne orsber V jnf obea gung
jnf: fvkglsvir. Naq Evfgbev va Ivraan. Jung vf guvf gur evtug anzr vf? Ol
Zbfraguny vg vf. Enpury, vf vg? Ab. Gur fprar ur jnf nyjnlf gnyxvat nobhg
jurer gur byq oyvaq Noenunz erpbtavfrf gur ibvpr naq chgf uvf svatref ba
uvf snpr.

Anguna'f ibvpr! Uvf fba'f ibvpr! V urne gur ibvpr bs Anguna jub yrsg uvf
sngure gb qvr bs tevrs naq zvfrel va zl nezf, jub yrsg gur ubhfr bs uvf
sngure naq yrsg gur Tbq bs uvf sngure.

Rirel jbeq vf fb qrrc, Yrbcbyq.

Cbbe cncn! Cbbe zna! V'z tynq V qvqa'g tb vagb gur ebbz gb ybbx ng uvf
snpr. Gung qnl! B, qrne! B, qrne! Ssbb! Jryy, creuncf vg jnf orfg sbe
uvz.

Ze Oybbz jrag ebhaq gur pbeare naq cnffrq gur qebbcvat antf bs gur
unmneq. Ab hfr guvaxvat bs vg nal zber. Abfront gvzr. Jvfu V unqa'g zrg
gung Z'Pbl sryybj.

Ur pnzr arnere naq urneq n pehapuvat bs tvyqrq bngf, gur tragyl punzcvat
grrgu. Gurve shyy ohpx rlrf ertneqrq uvz nf ur jrag ol, nzvq gur fjrrg
bngra errx bs ubefrcvff. Gurve Ryqbenqb. Cbbe whttvafrf! Qnza nyy gurl
xabj be pner nobhg nalguvat jvgu gurve ybat abfrf fghpx va abfrontf. Gbb
shyy sbe jbeqf. Fgvyy gurl trg gurve srrq nyy evtug naq gurve qbff.
Tryqrq gbb: n fghzc bs oynpx thggncrepun jnttvat yvzc orgjrra gurve
unhapurf. Zvtug or unccl nyy gur fnzr gung jnl. Tbbq cbbe oehgrf gurl
ybbx. Fgvyy gurve arvtu pna or irel veevgngvat.

Ur qerj gur yrggre sebz uvf cbpxrg naq sbyqrq vg vagb gur arjfcncre ur
pneevrq. Zvtug whfg jnyx vagb ure urer. Gur ynar vf fnsre.

Ur cnffrq gur pnozna'f furygre. Phevbhf gur yvsr bs qevsgvat pnoovrf. Nyy
jrnguref, nyy cynprf, gvzr be frgqbja, ab jvyy bs gurve bja. IBTYVB R
ABA. Yvxr gb tvir gurz na bqq pvtnerggr. Fbpvnoyr. Fubhg n srj sylvat
flyynoyrf nf gurl cnff. Ur uhzzrq:


    YN PV QNERZ YN ZNAB
    YN YN YNYN YN YN.


Ur ghearq vagb Phzoreynaq fgerrg naq, tbvat ba fbzr cnprf, unygrq
va gur yrr bs gur fgngvba jnyy. Ab-bar. Zrnqr'f gvzorelneq. Cvyrq onyxf.
Ehvaf naq grarzragf. Jvgu pnershy gernq ur cnffrq bire n ubcfpbgpu pbheg
jvgu vgf sbetbggra cvpxrlfgbar. Abg n fvaare. Arne gur gvzorelneq n
fdhnggrq puvyq ng zneoyrf, nybar, fubbgvat gur gnj jvgu n phaalguhzo. N
jvfr gnool, n oyvaxvat fcuvak, jngpurq sebz ure jnez fvyy. Cvgl gb qvfgheo
gurz. Zbunzzrq phg n cvrpr bhg bs uvf znagyr abg gb jnxr ure. Bcra vg.
Naq bapr V cynlrq zneoyrf jura V jrag gb gung byq qnzr'f fpubby. Fur yvxrq
zvtabarggr. Zef Ryyvf'f. Naq Ze? Ur bcrarq gur yrggre jvguva gur
arjfcncre.

N sybjre. V guvax vg'f n. N lryybj sybjre jvgu synggrarq crgnyf. Abg
naablrq gura? Jung qbrf fur fnl?


    Qrne Urael

V tbg lbhe ynfg yrggre gb zr naq gunax lbh irel zhpu sbe vg. V nz fbeel
lbh qvq abg yvxr zl ynfg yrggre. Jul qvq lbh rapybfr gur fgnzcf? V nz
njshyyl natel jvgu lbh. V qb jvfu V pbhyq chavfu lbh sbe gung. V pnyyrq
lbh anhtugl obl orpnhfr V qb abg yvxr gung bgure jbeyq. Cyrnfr gryy zr
jung vf gur erny zrnavat bs gung jbeq? Ner lbh abg unccl va lbhe ubzr lbh
cbbe yvggyr anhtugl obl? V qb jvfu V pbhyq qb fbzrguvat sbe lbh. Cyrnfr
gryy zr jung lbh guvax bs cbbe zr. V bsgra guvax bs gur ornhgvshy anzr lbh
unir. Qrne Urael, jura jvyy jr zrrg? V guvax bs lbh fb bsgra lbh unir ab
vqrn. V unir arire sryg zlfrys fb zhpu qenja gb n zna nf lbh. V srry fb
onq nobhg. Cyrnfr jevgr zr n ybat yrggre naq gryy zr zber. Erzrzore vs lbh
qb abg V jvyy chavfu lbh. Fb abj lbh xabj jung V jvyy qb gb lbh, lbh
anhtugl obl, vs lbh qb abg jebgr. B ubj V ybat gb zrrg lbh. Urael qrne, qb
abg qral zl erdhrfg orsber zl cngvrapr ner rkunhfgrq. Gura V jvyy gryy lbh
nyy. Tbbqolr abj, anhtugl qneyvat, V unir fhpu n onq urnqnpur. gbqnl. naq
jevgr OL ERGHEA gb lbhe ybatvat


    Znegun

C. F. Qb gryy zr jung xvaq bs creshzr qbrf lbhe jvsr hfr. V jnag gb xabj.


Ur gber gur sybjre teniryl sebz vgf cvaubyq fzryg vgf nyzbfg ab fzryy
naq cynprq vg va uvf urneg cbpxrg. Ynathntr bs sybjref. Gurl yvxr vg
orpnhfr ab-bar pna urne. Be n cbvfba obhdhrg gb fgevxr uvz qbja. Gura
jnyxvat fybjyl sbejneq ur ernq gur yrggre ntnva, zhezhevat urer naq gurer
n jbeq. Natel ghyvcf jvgu lbh qneyvat znasybjre chavfu lbhe pnpghf vs lbh
qba'g cyrnfr cbbe sbetrgzrabg ubj V ybat ivbyrgf gb qrne ebfrf jura jr
fbba narzbar zrrg nyy anhtugl avtugfgnyx jvsr Znegun'f creshzr. Univat
ernq vg nyy ur gbbx vg sebz gur arjfcncre naq chg vg onpx va uvf
fvqrcbpxrg.

Jrnx wbl bcrarq uvf yvcf. Punatrq fvapr gur svefg yrggre. Jbaqre
qvq fur jebgr vg urefrys. Qbvat gur vaqvtanag: n tvey bs tbbq
snzvyl yvxr zr, erfcrpgnoyr punenpgre. Pbhyq zrrg bar Fhaqnl nsgre gur
ebfnel. Gunax lbh: abg univat nal. Hfhny ybir fpevzzntr. Gura ehaavat
ebhaq pbearef. Onq nf n ebj jvgu Zbyyl. Pvtne unf n pbbyvat rssrpg.
Anepbgvp. Tb shegure arkg gvzr. Anhtugl obl: chavfu: nsenvq bs jbeqf, bs
pbhefr. Oehgny, jul abg? Gel vg nalubj. N ovg ng n gvzr.

Svatrevat fgvyy gur yrggre va uvf cbpxrg ur qerj gur cva bhg bs vg.
Pbzzba cva, ru? Ur guerj vg ba gur ebnq. Bhg bs ure pybgurf fbzrjurer:
cvaarq gbtrgure. Dhrre gur ahzore bs cvaf gurl nyjnlf unir. Ab ebfrf
jvgubhg gubeaf.

Syng Qhoyva ibvprf onjyrq va uvf urnq. Gubfr gjb fyhgf gung avtug va
gur Pbbzor, yvaxrq gbtrgure va gur enva.


    B, ZNEL YBFG GUR CVA BS URE QENJREF.
    FUR QVQA'G XABJ JUNG GB QB
    GB XRRC VG HC
    GB XRRC VG HC.


Vg? Gurz. Fhpu n onq urnqnpur. Unf ure ebfrf cebonoyl. Be fvggvat nyy qnl
glcvat. Rlrsbphf onq sbe fgbznpu areirf. Jung creshzr qbrf lbhe jvsr
hfr. Abj pbhyq lbh znxr bhg n guvat yvxr gung?

    GB XRRC VG HC.

Znegun, Znel. V fnj gung cvpgher fbzrjurer V sbetrg abj byq znfgre be
snxrq sbe zbarl. Ur vf fvggvat va gurve ubhfr, gnyxvat. Zlfgrevbhf. Nyfb
gur gjb fyhgf va gur Pbbzor jbhyq yvfgra.

    GB XRRC VG HC.

Avpr xvaq bs riravat srryvat. Ab zber jnaqrevat nobhg. Whfg ybyy gurer:
dhvrg qhfx: yrg rirelguvat evc. Sbetrg. Gryy nobhg cynprf lbh unir orra,
fgenatr phfgbzf. Gur bgure bar, wne ba ure urnq, jnf trggvat gur fhccre:
sehvg, byvirf, ybiryl pbby jngre bhg bs n jryy, fgbarpbyq yvxr gur ubyr va
gur jnyy ng Nfugbja. Zhfg pneel n cncre tboyrg arkg gvzr V tb gb gur
gebggvatzngpurf. Fur yvfgraf jvgu ovt qnex fbsg rlrf. Gryy ure: zber naq
zber: nyy. Gura n fvtu: fvyrapr. Ybat ybat ybat erfg.

Tbvat haqre gur envyjnl nepu ur gbbx bhg gur rairybcr, gber vg fjvsgyl
va fuerqf naq fpnggrerq gurz gbjneqf gur ebnq. Gur fuerqf syhggrerq njnl,
fnax va gur qnax nve: n juvgr syhggre, gura nyy fnax.

Urael Sybjre. Lbh pbhyq grne hc n purdhr sbe n uhaqerq cbhaqf va
gur fnzr jnl. Fvzcyr ovg bs cncre. Ybeq Virntu bapr pnfurq n frirasvther
purdhr sbe n zvyyvba va gur onax bs Verynaq. Fubjf lbh gur zbarl gb or
znqr bhg bs cbegre. Fgvyy gur bgure oebgure ybeq Neqvynha unf gb punatr
uvf fuveg sbhe gvzrf n qnl, gurl fnl. Fxva oerrqf yvpr be irezva. N
zvyyvba cbhaqf, jnvg n zbzrag. Gjbcrapr n cvag, sbhecrapr n dhneg,
rvtugcrapr n tnyyba bs cbegre, ab, bar naq sbhecrapr n tnyyba bs cbegre.
Bar naq sbhe vagb gjragl: svsgrra nobhg. Lrf, rknpgyl. Svsgrra zvyyvbaf bs
oneeryf bs cbegre.

Jung nz V fnlvat oneeryf? Tnyybaf. Nobhg n zvyyvba oneeryf nyy gur fnzr.

Na vapbzvat genva pynaxrq urnivyl nobir uvf urnq, pbnpu nsgre pbnpu.
Oneeryf ohzcrq va uvf urnq: qhyy cbegre fybccrq naq puhearq vafvqr. Gur
ohatubyrf fcenat bcra naq n uhtr qhyy sybbq yrnxrq bhg, sybjvat gbtrgure,
jvaqvat guebhtu zhqsyngf nyy bire gur yriry ynaq, n ynml cbbyvat fjvey bs
yvdhbe ornevat nybat jvqryrnirq sybjref bs vgf sebgu.

Ur unq ernpurq gur bcra onpxqbbe bs Nyy Unyybjf. Fgrccvat vagb gur
cbepu ur qbssrq uvf ung, gbbx gur pneq sebz uvf cbpxrg naq ghpxrq vg ntnva
oruvaq gur yrngure urnqonaq. Qnza vg. V zvtug unir gevrq gb jbex Z'Pbl
sbe n cnff gb Zhyyvatne.

Fnzr abgvpr ba gur qbbe. Frezba ol gur irel erireraq Wbua Pbazrr
F.W. ba fnvag Crgre Pynire F.W. naq gur Nsevpna Zvffvba. Cenlref sbe gur
pbairefvba bs Tynqfgbar gurl unq gbb jura ur jnf nyzbfg hapbafpvbhf.
Gur cebgrfgnagf ner gur fnzr. Pbaireg Qe Jvyyvnz W. Jnyfu Q.Q. gb gur
gehr eryvtvba. Fnir Puvan'f zvyyvbaf. Jbaqre ubj gurl rkcynva vg gb gur
urngura Puvarr. Cersre na bhapr bs bcvhz. Pryrfgvnyf. Enax urerfl sbe
gurz. Ohqqun gurve tbq ylvat ba uvf fvqr va gur zhfrhz. Gnxvat vg rnfl
jvgu unaq haqre uvf purrx. Wbfffgvpxf oheavat. Abg yvxr Rppr Ubzb. Pebja
bs gubeaf naq pebff. Pyrire vqrn Fnvag Cngevpx gur funzebpx. Pubcfgvpxf?
Pbazrr: Znegva Phaavatunz xabjf uvz: qvfgvathvfurqybbxvat. Fbeel V
qvqa'g jbex uvz nobhg trggvat Zbyyl vagb gur pubve vafgrnq bs gung Sngure
Sneyrl jub ybbxrq n sbby ohg jnfa'g. Gurl'er gnhtug gung. Ur'f abg tbvat
bhg va oyhrl fcrpf jvgu gur fjrng ebyyvat bss uvz gb oncgvfr oynpxf, vf
ur? Gur tynffrf jbhyq gnxr gurve snapl, synfuvat. Yvxr gb frr gurz fvggvat
ebhaq va n evat jvgu oyho yvcf, ragenaprq, yvfgravat. Fgvyy yvsr. Ync vg
hc yvxr zvyx, V fhccbfr.


Gur pbyq fzryy bs fnperq fgbar pnyyrq uvz. Ur gebq gur jbea fgrcf,
chfurq gur fjvatqbbe naq ragrerq fbsgyl ol gur erer.

Fbzrguvat tbvat ba: fbzr fbqnyvgl. Cvgl fb rzcgl. Avpr qvfperrg cynpr
gb or arkg fbzr tvey. Jub vf zl arvtuobhe? Wnzzrq ol gur ubhe gb fybj
zhfvp. Gung jbzna ng zvqavtug znff. Friragu urnira. Jbzra xaryg va gur
orapurf jvgu pevzfba unygref ebhaq gurve arpxf, urnqf objrq. N ongpu xaryg
ng gur nygneenvyf. Gur cevrfg jrag nybat ol gurz, zhezhevat, ubyqvat gur
guvat va uvf unaqf. Ur fgbccrq ng rnpu, gbbx bhg n pbzzhavba, fubbx n
qebc be gjb (ner gurl va jngre?) bss vg naq chg vg arngyl vagb ure zbhgu.
Ure ung naq urnq fnax. Gura gur arkg bar. Ure ung fnax ng bapr. Gura gur
arkg bar: n fznyy byq jbzna. Gur cevrfg orag qbja gb chg vg vagb ure
zbhgu, zhezhevat nyy gur gvzr. Yngva. Gur arkg bar. Fuhg lbhe rlrf naq
bcra lbhe zbhgu. Jung? PBECHF: obql. Pbecfr. Tbbq vqrn gur Yngva.
Fghcrsvrf gurz svefg. Ubfcvpr sbe gur qlvat. Gurl qba'g frrz gb purj vg:
bayl fjnyybj vg qbja. Ehz vqrn: rngvat ovgf bs n pbecfr. Jul gur pnaavonyf
pbggba gb vg.

Ur fgbbq nfvqr jngpuvat gurve oyvaq znfxf cnff qbja gur nvfyr, bar ol
bar, naq frrx gurve cynprf. Ur nccebnpurq n orapu naq frngrq uvzfrys va
vgf pbeare, ahefvat uvf ung naq arjfcncre. Gurfr cbgf jr unir gb jrne. Jr
bhtug gb unir ungf zbqryyrq ba bhe urnqf. Gurl jrer nobhg uvz urer naq
gurer, jvgu urnqf fgvyy objrq va gurve pevzfba unygref, jnvgvat sbe vg gb
zryg va gurve fgbznpuf. Fbzrguvat yvxr gubfr znmmbgu: vg'f gung fbeg bs
oernq: hayrnirarq furjoernq. Ybbx ng gurz. Abj V org vg znxrf gurz srry
unccl. Ybyyvcbc. Vg qbrf. Lrf, oernq bs natryf vg'f pnyyrq. Gurer'f n ovt
vqrn oruvaq vg, xvaq bs xvatqbz bs Tbq vf jvguva lbh srry. Svefg
pbzzhavpnagf. Ubxlcbxl craal n yhzc. Gura srry nyy yvxr bar snzvyl cnegl,
fnzr va gur gurnger, nyy va gur fnzr fjvz. Gurl qb. V'z fher bs gung. Abg
fb ybaryl. Va bhe pbasengreavgl. Gura pbzr bhg n ovg fcerrvfu. Yrg bss
fgrnz. Guvat vf vs lbh ernyyl oryvrir va vg. Ybheqrf pher, jngref bs
boyvivba, naq gur Xabpx nccnevgvba, fgnghrf oyrrqvat. Byq sryybj nfyrrc
arne gung pbasrffvbaobk. Urapr gubfr faberf. Oyvaq snvgu. Fnsr va gur nezf
bs xvatqbz pbzr. Yhyyf nyy cnva. Jnxr guvf gvzr arkg lrne.

Ur fnj gur cevrfg fgbj gur pbzzhavba phc njnl, jryy va, naq xarry
na vafgnag orsber vg, fubjvat n ynetr terl obbgfbyr sebz haqre gur ynpr
nssnve ur unq ba. Fhccbfr ur ybfg gur cva bs uvf. Ur jbhyqa'g xabj jung gb
qb gb. Onyq fcbg oruvaq. Yrggref ba uvf onpx: V.A.E.V? Ab: V.U.F.
Zbyyl gbyq zr bar gvzr V nfxrq ure. V unir fvaarq: be ab: V unir fhssrerq,
vg vf. Naq gur bgure bar? Veba anvyf ena va.

Zrrg bar Fhaqnl nsgre gur ebfnel. Qb abg qral zl erdhrfg. Ghea hc
jvgu n irvy naq oynpx ont. Qhfx naq gur yvtug oruvaq ure. Fur zvtug or
urer jvgu n evooba ebhaq ure arpx naq qb gur bgure guvat nyy gur fnzr ba
gur fyl. Gurve punenpgre. Gung sryybj gung ghearq dhrra'f rivqrapr ba gur
vaivapvoyrf ur hfrq gb erprvir gur, Pnerl jnf uvf anzr, gur pbzzhavba
rirel zbeavat. Guvf irel puhepu. Crgre Pnerl, lrf. Ab, Crgre Pynire V nz
guvaxvat bs. Qravf Pnerl. Naq whfg vzntvar gung. Jvsr naq fvk puvyqera
ng ubzr. Naq cybggvat gung zheqre nyy gur gvzr. Gubfr penjguhzcref,
abj gung'f n tbbq anzr sbe gurz, gurer'f nyjnlf fbzrguvat fuvsglybbxvat
nobhg gurz. Gurl'er abg fgenvtug zra bs ohfvarff rvgure. B, ab, fur'f
abg urer: gur sybjre: ab, ab. Ol gur jnl, qvq V grne hc gung rairybcr?
Lrf: haqre gur oevqtr.

Gur cevrfg jnf evafvat bhg gur punyvpr: gura ur gbffrq bss gur qertf
fznegyl. Jvar. Znxrf vg zber nevfgbpengvp guna sbe rknzcyr vs ur qenax
jung gurl ner hfrq gb Thvaarff'f cbegre be fbzr grzcrenapr orirentr
Jurngyrl'f Qhoyva ubc ovggref be Pnageryy naq Pbpuenar'f tvatre nyr
(nebzngvp). Qbrfa'g tvir gurz nal bs vg: furj jvar: bayl gur bgure. Pbyq
pbzsbeg. Cvbhf senhq ohg dhvgr evtug: bgurejvfr gurl'q unir bar byq obbfre
jbefr guna nabgure pbzvat nybat, pnqtvat sbe n qevax. Dhrre gur jubyr
ngzbfcurer bs gur. Dhvgr evtug. Cresrpgyl evtug gung vf.

Ze Oybbz ybbxrq onpx gbjneqf gur pubve. Abg tbvat gb or nal zhfvp.
Cvgl. Jub unf gur betna urer V jbaqre? Byq Tylaa ur xarj ubj gb znxr
gung vafgehzrag gnyx, gur IVOENGB: svsgl cbhaqf n lrne gurl fnl ur unq va
Tneqvare fgerrg. Zbyyl jnf va svar ibvpr gung qnl, gur FGNONG ZNGRE bs
Ebffvav. Sngure Oreaneq Inhtuna'f frezba svefg. Puevfg be Cvyngr? Puevfg,
ohg qba'g xrrc hf nyy avtug bire vg. Zhfvp gurl jnagrq. Sbbgqevyy fgbccrq.
Pbhyq urne n cva qebc. V gbyq ure gb cvgpu ure ibvpr ntnvafg gung pbeare.
V pbhyq srry gur guevyy va gur nve, gur shyy, gur crbcyr ybbxvat hc:

DHVF RFG UBZB.

Fbzr bs gung byq fnperq zhfvp fcyraqvq. Zrepnqnagr: frira ynfg
jbeqf. Zbmneg'f gjrysgu znff: TYBEVN va gung. Gubfr byq cbcrf xrra ba
zhfvp, ba neg naq fgnghrf naq cvpgherf bs nyy xvaqf. Cnyrfgevan sbe
rknzcyr gbb. Gurl unq n tnl byq gvzr juvyr vg ynfgrq. Urnygul gbb,
punagvat, erthyne ubhef, gura oerj yvdhrhef. Orarqvpgvar. Terra
Punegerhfr. Fgvyy, univat rhahpuf va gurve pubve gung jnf pbzvat vg n ovg
guvpx. Jung xvaq bs ibvpr vf vg? Zhfg or phevbhf gb urne nsgre gurve bja
fgebat onffrf. Pbaabvffrhef. Fhccbfr gurl jbhyqa'g srry nalguvat nsgre.
Xvaq bs n cynpvq. Ab jbeel. Snyy vagb syrfu, qba'g gurl? Tyhggbaf, gnyy,
ybat yrtf. Jub xabjf? Rhahpu. Bar jnl bhg bs vg.

Ur fnj gur cevrfg oraq qbja naq xvff gur nygne naq gura snpr nobhg
naq oyrff nyy gur crbcyr. Nyy pebffrq gurzfryirf naq fgbbq hc. Ze Oybbz
tynaprq nobhg uvz naq gura fgbbq hc, ybbxvat bire gur evfra ungf. Fgnaq hc
ng gur tbfcry bs pbhefr. Gura nyy frggyrq qbja ba gurve xarrf ntnva naq ur
fng onpx dhvrgyl va uvf orapu. Gur cevrfg pnzr qbja sebz gur nygne,
ubyqvat gur guvat bhg sebz uvz, naq ur naq gur znffobl nafjrerq rnpu bgure
va Yngva. Gura gur cevrfg xaryg qbja naq ortna gb ernq bss n pneq:

--B Tbq, bhe ershtr naq bhe fgeratgu ...

Ze Oybbz chg uvf snpr sbejneq gb pngpu gur jbeqf. Ratyvfu. Guebj
gurz gur obar. V erzrzore fyvtugyl. Ubj ybat fvapr lbhe ynfg znff?
Tybevbhf naq vzznphyngr ivetva. Wbfrcu, ure fcbhfr. Crgre naq Cnhy. Zber
vagrerfgvat vs lbh haqrefgbbq jung vg jnf nyy nobhg. Jbaqreshy
betnavfngvba pregnvayl, tbrf yvxr pybpxjbex. Pbasrffvba. Rirelbar jnagf
gb. Gura V jvyy gryy lbh nyy. Cranapr. Chavfu zr, cyrnfr. Terng jrncba va
gurve unaqf. Zber guna qbpgbe be fbyvpvgbe. Jbzna qlvat gb. Naq V
fpufpufpufpufpufpu. Naq qvq lbh punpunpunpunpun? Naq jul qvq lbh? Ybbx
qbja ng ure evat gb svaq na rkphfr. Juvfcrevat tnyyrel jnyyf unir rnef.
Uhfonaq yrnea gb uvf fhecevfr. Tbq'f yvggyr wbxr. Gura bhg fur pbzrf.
Ercragnapr fxvaqrrc. Ybiryl funzr. Cenl ng na nygne. Unvy Znel naq
Ubyl Znel. Sybjref, vaprafr, pnaqyrf zrygvat. Uvqr ure oyhfurf.
Fnyingvba nezl oyngnag vzvgngvba. Ersbezrq cebfgvghgr jvyy nqqerff
gur zrrgvat. Ubj V sbhaq gur Ybeq. Fdhnerurnqrq puncf gubfr zhfg or
va Ebzr: gurl jbex gur jubyr fubj. Naq qba'g gurl enxr va gur zbarl gbb?
Ordhrfgf nyfb: gb gur C.C. sbe gur gvzr orvat va uvf nofbyhgr qvfpergvba.
Znffrf sbe gur ercbfr bs zl fbhy gb or fnvq choyvpyl jvgu bcra qbbef.
Zbanfgrevrf naq pbairagf. Gur cevrfg va gung Sreznantu jvyy pnfr va
gur jvgarffobk. Ab oebjorngvat uvz. Ur unq uvf nafjre cng sbe rirelguvat.
Yvoregl naq rknygngvba bs bhe ubyl zbgure gur puhepu. Gur qbpgbef bs gur
puhepu: gurl znccrq bhg gur jubyr gurbybtl bs vg.

Gur cevrfg cenlrq:

--Oyrffrq Zvpunry, nepunatry, qrsraq hf va gur ubhe bs pbasyvpg. Or bhe
fnsrthneq ntnvafg gur jvpxrqarff naq fanerf bs gur qrivy (znl Tbq erfgenva
uvz, jr uhzoyl cenl!): naq qb gubh, B cevapr bs gur urnirayl ubfg, ol gur
cbjre bs Tbq guehfg Fngna qbja gb uryy naq jvgu uvz gubfr bgure jvpxrq
fcvevgf jub jnaqre guebhtu gur jbeyq sbe gur ehva bs fbhyf.

Gur cevrfg naq gur znffobl fgbbq hc naq jnyxrq bss. Nyy bire. Gur
jbzra erznvarq oruvaq: gunaxftvivat.

Orggre or fubivat nybat. Oebgure Ohmm. Pbzr nebhaq jvgu gur cyngr
creuncf. Cnl lbhe Rnfgre qhgl.

Ur fgbbq hc. Uryyb. Jrer gubfr gjb ohggbaf bs zl jnvfgpbng bcra nyy
gur gvzr? Jbzra rawbl vg. Arire gryy lbh. Ohg jr. Rkphfr, zvff, gurer'f n
(juu!) whfg n (juu!) syhss. Be gurve fxveg oruvaq, cynpxrg haubbxrq.
Tyvzcfrf bs gur zbba. Naablrq vs lbh qba'g. Jul qvqa'g lbh gryy zr
orsber. Fgvyy yvxr lbh orggre hagvql. Tbbq wbo vg jnfa'g snegure fbhgu. Ur
cnffrq, qvfperrgyl ohggbavat, qbja gur nvfyr naq bhg guebhtu gur znva qbbe
vagb gur yvtug. Ur fgbbq n zbzrag hafrrvat ol gur pbyq oynpx zneoyr objy
juvyr orsber uvz naq oruvaq gjb jbefuvccref qvccrq shegvir unaqf va gur
ybj gvqr bs ubyl jngre. Genzf: n pne bs Cerfpbgg'f qlrjbexf: n jvqbj va
ure  jrrqf. Abgvpr orpnhfr V'z va zbheavat zlfrys. Ur pbirerq uvzfrys. Ubj
tbrf gur gvzr? Dhnegre cnfg. Gvzr rabhtu lrg. Orggre trg gung ybgvba znqr
hc. Jurer vf guvf? Nu lrf, gur ynfg gvzr. Fjral'f va Yvapbya cynpr.
Purzvfgf eneryl zbir. Gurve terra naq tbyq ornpbawnef gbb urnil gb fgve.
Unzvygba Ybat'f, sbhaqrq va gur lrne bs gur sybbq. Uhthrabg puhepulneq
arne gurer. Ivfvg fbzr qnl.

Ur jnyxrq fbhgujneq nybat Jrfgynaq ebj. Ohg gur erpvcr vf va gur
bgure gebhfref. B, naq V sbetbg gung yngpuxrl gbb. Ober guvf shareny
nssnve. B jryy, cbbe sryybj, vg'f abg uvf snhyg. Jura jnf vg V tbg vg znqr
hc ynfg? Jnvg. V punatrq n fbirervta V erzrzore. Svefg bs gur zbagu vg
zhfg unir orra be gur frpbaq. B, ur pna ybbx vg hc va gur cerfpevcgvbaf
obbx.

Gur purzvfg ghearq onpx cntr nsgre cntr. Fnaql fueviryyrq fzryy ur
frrzf gb unir. Fuehaxra fxhyy. Naq byq. Dhrfg sbe gur cuvybfbcure'f fgbar.
Gur nypurzvfgf. Qehtf ntr lbh nsgre zragny rkpvgrzrag. Yrgunetl gura.
Jul? Ernpgvba. N yvsrgvzr va n avtug. Tenqhnyyl punatrf lbhe punenpgre.
Yvivat nyy gur qnl nzbat ureof, bvagzragf, qvfvasrpgnagf. Nyy uvf
nynonfgre yvylcbgf. Zbegne naq crfgyr. Nd. Qvfg. Sby. Ynhe. Gr Ivevq.
Fzryy nyzbfg pher lbh yvxr gur qragvfg'f qbbeoryy. Qbpgbe Junpx. Ur bhtug
gb culfvp uvzfrys n ovg. Ryrpghnel be rzhyfvba. Gur svefg sryybj gung
cvpxrq na ureo gb pher uvzfrys unq n ovg bs cyhpx. Fvzcyrf. Jnag gb or
pnershy. Rabhtu fghss urer gb puybebsbez lbh. Grfg: gheaf oyhr yvgzhf
cncre erq. Puybebsbez. Bireqbfr bs ynhqnahz. Fyrrcvat qenhtugf.
Ybircuvygerf. Cnentbevp cbcclflehc onq sbe pbhtu. Pybtf gur cberf be gur
cuyrtz. Cbvfbaf gur bayl pherf. Erzrql jurer lbh yrnfg rkcrpg vg. Pyrire
bs angher.

--Nobhg n sbegavtug ntb, fve?

--Lrf, Ze Oybbz fnvq.

Ur jnvgrq ol gur pbhagre, vaunyvat fybjyl gur xrra errx bs qehtf, gur
qhfgl qel fzryy bs fcbatrf naq ybbsnuf. Ybg bs gvzr gnxra hc gryyvat lbhe
npurf naq cnvaf.

--Fjrrg nyzbaq bvy naq gvapgher bs orambva, Ze Oybbz fnvq, naq gura
benatrsybjre jngre ...

Vg pregnvayl qvq znxr ure fxva fb qryvpngr juvgr yvxr jnk.

--Naq juvgr jnk nyfb, ur fnvq.

Oevatf bhg gur qnexarff bs ure rlrf. Ybbxvat ng zr, gur furrg hc gb
ure rlrf, Fcnavfu, fzryyvat urefrys, jura V jnf svkvat gur yvaxf va zl
phssf. Gubfr ubzryl erpvcrf ner bsgra gur orfg: fgenjoreevrf sbe gur
grrgu: arggyrf naq envajngre: bngzrny gurl fnl fgrrcrq va ohggrezvyx.
Fxvasbbq. Bar bs gur byq dhrra'f fbaf, qhxr bs Nyonal jnf vg? unq bayl bar
fxva. Yrbcbyq, lrf. Guerr jr unir. Jnegf, ohavbaf naq cvzcyrf gb znxr vg
jbefr. Ohg lbh jnag n creshzr gbb. Jung creshzr qbrf lbhe? CRNH Q'RFCNTAR.
Gung benatrsybjre jngre vf fb serfu. Avpr fzryy gurfr fbncf unir. Cher
pheq fbnc. Gvzr gb trg n ongu ebhaq gur pbeare. Unzznz. Ghexvfu. Znffntr.
Qveg trgf ebyyrq hc va lbhe aniry. Avpre vs n avpr tvey qvq vg. Nyfb V
guvax V. Lrf V. Qb vg va gur ongu. Phevbhf ybatvat V. Jngre gb jngre.
Pbzovar ohfvarff jvgu cyrnfher. Cvgl ab gvzr sbe znffntr. Srry serfu gura
nyy gur qnl. Shareny or engure tyhz.

--Lrf, fve, gur purzvfg fnvq. Gung jnf gjb naq avar. Unir lbh oebhtug n
obggyr?

--Ab, Ze Oybbz fnvq. Znxr vg hc, cyrnfr. V'yy pnyy yngre va gur qnl naq
V'yy gnxr bar bs gurfr fbncf. Ubj zhpu ner gurl?

--Sbhecrapr, fve.

Ze Oybbz envfrq n pnxr gb uvf abfgevyf. Fjrrg yrzbal jnk.

--V'yy gnxr guvf bar, ur fnvq. Gung znxrf guerr naq n craal.

--Lrf, fve, gur purzvfg fnvq. Lbh pna cnl nyy gbtrgure, fve, jura lbh
pbzr onpx.

--Tbbq, Ze Oybbz fnvq.

Ur fgebyyrq bhg bs gur fubc, gur arjfcncre ongba haqre uvf nezcvg,
gur pbbyjenccrerq fbnc va uvf yrsg unaq.

Ng uvf nezcvg Onagnz Ylbaf' ibvpr naq unaq fnvq:

--Uryyb, Oybbz. Jung'f gur orfg arjf? Vf gung gbqnl'f? Fubj hf n zvahgr.

Funirq bss uvf zbhfgnpur ntnva, ol Wbir! Ybat pbyq hccre yvc. Gb
ybbx lbhatre. Ur qbrf ybbx onyzl. Lbhatre guna V nz.

Onagnz Ylbaf'f lryybj oynpxanvyrq svatref haebyyrq gur ongba. Jnagf
n jnfu gbb. Gnxr bss gur ebhtu qveg. Tbbq zbeavat, unir lbh hfrq Crnef'
fbnc? Qnaqehss ba uvf fubhyqref. Fpnyc jnagf bvyvat.

--V jnag gb frr nobhg gung Serapu ubefr gung'f ehaavat gbqnl, Onagnz
Ylbaf fnvq. Jurer gur ohttre vf vg?

Ur ehfgyrq gur cyrngrq cntrf, wrexvat uvf puva ba uvf uvtu pbyyne.
Oneore'f vgpu. Gvtug pbyyne ur'yy ybfr uvf unve. Orggre yrnir uvz gur
cncre naq trg fuhg bs uvz.

--Lbh pna xrrc vg, Ze Oybbz fnvq.

--Nfpbg. Tbyq phc. Jnvg, Onagnz Ylbaf zhggrerq. Unys n zb. Znkvzhz
gur frpbaq.

--V jnf whfg tbvat gb guebj vg njnl, Ze Oybbz fnvq.

Onagnz Ylbaf envfrq uvf rlrf fhqqrayl naq yrrerq jrnxyl.

--Jung'f gung? uvf funec ibvpr fnvq.

--V fnl lbh pna xrrc vg, Ze Oybbz nafjrerq. V jnf tbvat gb guebj vg njnl
gung zbzrag.

Onagnz Ylbaf qbhogrq na vafgnag, yrrevat: gura guehfg gur bhgfcernq
furrgf onpx ba Ze Oybbz'f nezf.

--V'yy evfx vg, ur fnvq. Urer, gunaxf.

Ur fcrq bss gbjneqf Pbajnl'f pbeare. Tbq fcrrq fphg.

Ze Oybbz sbyqrq gur furrgf ntnva gb n arng fdhner naq ybqtrq gur
fbnc va vg, fzvyvat. Fvyyl yvcf bs gung punc. Orggvat. Erthyne ubgorq bs
vg yngryl. Zrffratre oblf fgrnyvat gb chg ba fvkcrapr. Enssyr sbe ynetr
graqre ghexrl. Lbhe Puevfgznf qvaare sbe guerrcrapr. Wnpx Syrzvat
rzormmyvat gb tnzoyr gura fzhttyrq bss gb Nzrevpn. Xrrcf n ubgry abj. Gurl
arire pbzr onpx. Syrfucbgf bs Rtlcg.

Ur jnyxrq purreshyyl gbjneqf gur zbfdhr bs gur onguf. Erzvaq lbh
bs n zbfdhr, erqonxrq oevpxf, gur zvanergf. Pbyyrtr fcbegf gbqnl V frr. Ur
rlrq gur ubefrfubr cbfgre bire gur tngr bs pbyyrtr cnex: plpyvfg qbhoyrq
hc yvxr n pbq va n cbg. Qnza onq nq. Abj vs gurl unq znqr vg ebhaq yvxr n
jurry. Gura gur fcbxrf: fcbegf, fcbegf, fcbegf: naq gur uho ovt: pbyyrtr.
Fbzrguvat gb pngpu gur rlr.

Gurer'f Ubeaoybjre fgnaqvat ng gur cbegre'f ybqtr. Xrrc uvz ba
unaqf: zvtug gnxr n ghea va gurer ba gur abq. Ubj qb lbh qb, Ze
Ubeaoybjre? Ubj qb lbh qb, fve?

Urnirayl jrngure ernyyl. Vs yvsr jnf nyjnlf yvxr gung. Pevpxrg jrngure.
Fvg nebhaq haqre fhafunqrf. Bire nsgre bire. Bhg. Gurl pna'g cynl vg urer.
Qhpx sbe fvk jvpxrgf. Fgvyy Pncgnva Phyyre oebxr n jvaqbj va gur Xvyqner
fgerrg pyho jvgu n fybt gb fdhner yrt. Qbaaloebbx snve zber va gurve yvar.
Naq gur fxhyyf jr jrer npenpxvat jura Z'Pnegul gbbx gur sybbe.
Urngjnir. Jba'g ynfg. Nyjnlf cnffvat, gur fgernz bs yvsr, juvpu va gur
fgernz bs yvsr jr genpr vf qrnere guna gurz nyy.

Rawbl n ongu abj: pyrna gebhtu bs jngre, pbby ranzry, gur tragyr
grcvq fgernz. Guvf vf zl obql.

Ur sberfnj uvf cnyr obql erpyvarq va vg ng shyy, anxrq, va n jbzo bs
jnezgu, bvyrq ol fpragrq zrygvat fbnc, fbsgyl ynirq. Ur fnj uvf gehax naq
yvzof evcevccyrq bire naq fhfgnvarq, ohblrq yvtugyl hcjneq, yrzbalryybj:
uvf aniry, ohq bs syrfu: naq fnj gur qnex gnatyrq pheyf bs uvf ohfu
sybngvat, sybngvat unve bs gur fgernz nebhaq gur yvzc sngure bs gubhfnaqf,
n ynathvq sybngvat sybjre.


    * * * * * * *


Znegva Phaavatunz, svefg, cbxrq uvf fvyxunggrq urnq vagb gur pernxvat
pneevntr naq, ragrevat qrsgyl, frngrq uvzfrys. Ze Cbjre fgrccrq va nsgre
uvz, pheivat uvf urvtug jvgu pner.

--Pbzr ba, Fvzba.

--Nsgre lbh, Ze Oybbz fnvq.

Ze Qrqnyhf pbirerq uvzfrys dhvpxyl naq tbg va, fnlvat:

Lrf, lrf.

--Ner jr nyy urer abj? Znegva Phaavatunz nfxrq. Pbzr nybat, Oybbz.

Ze Oybbz ragrerq naq fng va gur inpnag cynpr. Ur chyyrq gur qbbe gb
nsgre uvz naq fynzzrq vg gjvpr gvyy vg fuhg gvtug. Ur cnffrq na nez
guebhtu gur nezfgenc naq ybbxrq frevbhfyl sebz gur bcra pneevntrjvaqbj ng
gur ybjrerq oyvaqf bs gur nirahr. Bar qenttrq nfvqr: na byq jbzna crrcvat.
Abfr juvgrsynggrarq ntnvafg gur cnar. Gunaxvat ure fgnef fur jnf cnffrq
bire. Rkgenbeqvanel gur vagrerfg gurl gnxr va n pbecfr. Tynq gb frr hf tb
jr tvir gurz fhpu gebhoyr pbzvat. Wbo frrzf gb fhvg gurz. Uhttrezhttre va
pbearef. Fybc nobhg va fyvccrefynccref sbe srne ur'q jnxr. Gura trggvat vg
ernql. Ynlvat vg bhg. Zbyyl naq Zef Syrzvat znxvat gur orq. Chyy vg zber
gb lbhe fvqr. Bhe jvaqvatfurrg. Arire xabj jub jvyy gbhpu lbh qrnq.
Jnfu naq funzcbb. V oryvrir gurl pyvc gur anvyf naq gur unve. Xrrc n ovg
va na rairybcr. Tebjf nyy gur fnzr nsgre. Hapyrna wbo.

Nyy jnvgrq. Abguvat jnf fnvq. Fgbjvat va gur jernguf cebonoyl. V nz
fvggvat ba fbzrguvat uneq. Nu, gung fbnc: va zl uvc cbpxrg. Orggre fuvsg
vg bhg bs gung. Jnvg sbe na bccbeghavgl.

Nyy jnvgrq. Gura jurryf jrer urneq sebz va sebag, gheavat: gura
arnere: gura ubefrf' ubbsf. N wbyg. Gurve pneevntr ortna gb zbir, pernxvat
naq fjnlvat. Bgure ubbsf naq pernxvat jurryf fgnegrq oruvaq. Gur oyvaqf
bs gur nirahr cnffrq naq ahzore avar jvgu vgf pencrq xabpxre, qbbe nwne.
Ng jnyxvat cnpr.

Gurl jnvgrq fgvyy, gurve xarrf wbttvat, gvyy gurl unq ghearq naq jrer
cnffvat nybat gur genzgenpxf. Gevgbaivyyr ebnq. Dhvpxre. Gur jurryf
enggyrq ebyyvat bire gur pbooyrq pnhfrjnl naq gur penml tynffrf fubbx
enggyvat va gur qbbesenzrf.

--Jung jnl vf ur gnxvat hf? Ze Cbjre nfxrq guebhtu obgu jvaqbjf.

--Vevfugbja, Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq. Evatfraq. Oehafjvpx fgerrg.

Ze Qrqnyhf abqqrq, ybbxvat bhg.

--Gung'f n svar byq phfgbz, ur fnvq. V nz tynq gb frr vg unf abg qvrq bhg.

Nyy jngpurq njuvyr guebhtu gurve jvaqbjf pncf naq ungf yvsgrq ol
cnffref. Erfcrpg. Gur pneevntr fjreirq sebz gur genzgenpx gb gur fzbbgure
ebnq cnfg Jngrel ynar. Ze Oybbz ng tnmr fnj n yvgur lbhat zna, pynq va
zbheavat, n jvqr ung.

--Gurer'f n sevraq bs lbhef tbar ol, Qrqnyhf, ur fnvq.

--Jub vf gung?

--Lbhe fba naq urve.

--Jurer vf ur? Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq, fgergpuvat bire npebff.

Gur pneevntr, cnffvat gur bcra qenvaf naq zbhaqf bs evccrqhc
ebnqjnl orsber gur grarzrag ubhfrf, yhepurq ebhaq gur pbeare naq,
fjreivat onpx gb gur genzgenpx, ebyyrq ba abvfvyl jvgu punggrevat jurryf.
Ze Qrqnyhf sryy onpx, fnlvat:

--Jnf gung Zhyyvtna pnq jvgu uvz? Uvf SVQHF NPUNGRF!

--Ab, Ze Oybbz fnvq. Ur jnf nybar.

--Qbja jvgu uvf nhag Fnyyl, V fhccbfr, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq, gur Tbhyqvat
snpgvba, gur qehaxra yvggyr pbfgqenjre naq Pevffvr, cncn'f yvggyr yhzc bs
qhat, gur jvfr puvyq gung xabjf ure bja sngure.

Ze Oybbz fzvyrq wblyrffyl ba Evatfraq ebnq. Jnyynpr Oebf: gur
obggyrjbexf: Qbqqre oevqtr.

Evpuvr Tbhyqvat naq gur yrtny ont. Tbhyqvat, Pbyyvf naq Jneq ur
pnyyf gur svez. Uvf wbxrf ner trggvat n ovg qnzc. Terng pneq ur jnf.
Jnygmvat va Fgnzre fgerrg jvgu Vtangvhf Tnyynure ba n Fhaqnl zbeavat, gur
ynaqynql'f gjb ungf cvaarq ba uvf urnq. Bhg ba gur enzcntr nyy avtug.
Ortvaavat gb gryy ba uvz abj: gung onpxnpur bs uvf, V srne. Jvsr vebavat
uvf onpx. Guvaxf ur'yy pher vg jvgu cvyyf. Nyy oernqpehzof gurl ner.
Nobhg fvk uhaqerq cre prag cebsvg.

--Ur'f va jvgu n ybjqbja pebjq, Ze Qrqnyhf faneyrq. Gung Zhyyvtna vf n
pbagnzvangrq oybbql qbhoyrqlrq ehssvna ol nyy nppbhagf. Uvf anzr fgvaxf
nyy bire Qhoyva. Ohg jvgu gur uryc bs Tbq naq Uvf oyrffrq zbgure V'yy znxr
vg zl ohfvarff gb jevgr n yrggre bar bs gubfr qnlf gb uvf zbgure be uvf
nhag be jungrire fur vf gung jvyy bcra ure rlr nf jvqr nf n tngr. V'yy
gvpxyr uvf pngnfgebcur, oryvrir lbh zr.

Ur pevrq nobir gur pynggre bs gur jurryf:

--V jba'g unir ure onfgneq bs n arcurj ehva zl fba. N pbhagrewhzcre'f
fba. Fryyvat gncrf va zl pbhfva, Crgre Cnhy Z'Fjvarl'f. Abg yvxryl.

Ur prnfrq. Ze Oybbz tynaprq sebz uvf natel zbhfgnpur gb Ze Cbjre'f
zvyq snpr naq Znegva Phaavatunz'f rlrf naq orneq, teniryl funxvat.
Abvfl frysjvyyrq zna. Shyy bs uvf fba. Ur vf evtug. Fbzrguvat gb
unaq ba. Vs yvggyr Ehql unq yvirq. Frr uvz tebj hc. Urne uvf ibvpr va gur
ubhfr. Jnyxvat orfvqr Zbyyl va na Rgba fhvg. Zl fba. Zr va uvf rlrf.
Fgenatr srryvat vg jbhyq or. Sebz zr. Whfg n punapr. Zhfg unir orra gung
zbeavat va Enlzbaq greenpr fur jnf ng gur jvaqbj jngpuvat gur gjb qbtf
ng vg ol gur jnyy bs gur prnfr gb qb rivy. Naq gur fretrnag tevaavat hc.
Fur unq gung pernz tbja ba jvgu gur evc fur arire fgvgpurq. Tvir hf n
gbhpu, Cbyql. Tbq, V'z qlvat sbe vg. Ubj yvsr ortvaf.

Tbg ovt gura. Unq gb ershfr gur Terlfgbarf pbapreg. Zl fba vafvqr
ure. V pbhyq unir urycrq uvz ba va yvsr. V pbhyq. Znxr uvz vaqrcraqrag.
Yrnea Trezna gbb.

--Ner jr yngr? Ze Cbjre nfxrq.

--Gra zvahgrf, Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq, ybbxvat ng uvf jngpu.

Zbyyl. Zvyyl. Fnzr guvat jngrerq qbja. Ure gbzobl bnguf. B whzcvat
Whcvgre! Lr tbqf naq yvggyr svfurf! Fgvyy, fur'f n qrne tvey. Fbba
or n jbzna. Zhyyvatne. Qrnerfg Cncyv. Lbhat fghqrag. Lrf, lrf: n jbzna
gbb. Yvsr, yvsr.

Gur pneevntr urryrq bire naq onpx, gurve sbhe gehaxf fjnlvat.

--Pbeal zvtug unir tvira hf n zber pbzzbqvbhf lbxr, Ze Cbjre fnvq.

--Ur zvtug, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq, vs ur unqa'g gung fdhvag gebhoyvat uvz. Qb
lbh sbyybj zr?

Ur pybfrq uvf yrsg rlr. Znegva Phaavatunz ortna gb oehfu njnl
pehfgpehzof sebz haqre uvf guvtuf.

--Jung vf guvf, ur fnvq, va gur anzr bs Tbq? Pehzof?

--Fbzrbar frrzf gb unir orra znxvat n cvpavp cnegl urer yngryl, Ze Cbjre
fnvq.

Nyy envfrq gurve guvtuf naq rlrq jvgu qvfsnibhe gur zvyqrjrq
ohggbayrff yrngure bs gur frngf. Ze Qrqnyhf, gjvfgvat uvf abfr, sebjarq
qbjajneq naq fnvq:

--Hayrff V'z terngyl zvfgnxra. Jung qb lbh guvax, Znegva?

--Vg fgehpx zr gbb, Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq.

Ze Oybbz frg uvf guvtu qbja. Tynq V gbbx gung ongu. Srry zl srrg
dhvgr pyrna. Ohg V jvfu Zef Syrzvat unq qnearq gurfr fbpxf orggre.

Ze Qrqnyhf fvturq erfvtarqyl.

--Nsgre nyy, ur fnvq, vg'f gur zbfg angheny guvat va gur jbeyq.

--Qvq Gbz Xreana ghea hc? Znegva Phaavatunz nfxrq, gjveyvat gur crnx
bs uvf orneq tragyl.

--Lrf, Ze Oybbz nafjrerq. Ur'f oruvaq jvgu Arq Ynzoreg naq Ularf.

--Naq Pbeal Xryyrure uvzfrys? Ze Cbjre nfxrq.

--Ng gur przrgrel, Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq.

--V zrg Z'Pbl guvf zbeavat, Ze Oybbz fnvq. Ur fnvq ur'q gel gb pbzr.

Gur pneevntr unygrq fubeg.

--Jung'f jebat?

--Jr'er fgbccrq.

--Jurer ner jr?

Ze Oybbz chg uvf urnq bhg bs gur jvaqbj.

--Gur tenaq pnany, ur fnvq.

Tnfjbexf. Jubbcvat pbhtu gurl fnl vg pherf. Tbbq wbo Zvyyl arire
tbg vg. Cbbe puvyqera! Qbhoyrf gurz hc oynpx naq oyhr va pbaihyfvbaf.
Funzr ernyyl. Tbg bss yvtugyl jvgu vyyarffrf pbzcnerq. Bayl zrnfyrf.
Synkfrrq grn. Fpneyngvan, vasyhramn rcvqrzvpf. Pnainffvat sbe qrngu. Qba'g
zvff guvf punapr. Qbtf' ubzr bire gurer. Cbbe byq Ngubf! Or tbbq gb Ngubf,
Yrbcbyq, vf zl ynfg jvfu. Gul jvyy or qbar. Jr borl gurz va gur tenir. N
qlvat fpenjy. Ur gbbx vg gb urneg, cvarq njnl. Dhvrg oehgr. Byq zra'f qbtf
hfhnyyl ner.

N envaqebc fcng ba uvf ung. Ur qerj onpx naq fnj na vafgnag bs
fubjre fcenl qbgf bire gur terl syntf. Ncneg. Phevbhf. Yvxr guebhtu n
pbynaqre. V gubhtug vg jbhyq. Zl obbgf jrer pernxvat V erzrzore abj.

--Gur jrngure vf punatvat, ur fnvq dhvrgyl.

--N cvgl vg qvq abg xrrc hc svar, Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq.

--Jnagrq sbe gur pbhagel, Ze Cbjre fnvq. Gurer'f gur fha ntnva pbzvat bhg.

Ze Qrqnyhf, crrevat guebhtu uvf tynffrf gbjneqf gur irvyrq fha,
uheyrq n zhgr phefr ng gur fxl.

--Vg'f nf hapregnva nf n puvyq'f obggbz, ur fnvq.

--Jr'er bss ntnva.

Gur pneevntr ghearq ntnva vgf fgvss jurryf naq gurve gehaxf fjnlrq
tragyl. Znegva Phaavatunz gjveyrq zber dhvpxyl gur crnx bs uvf orneq.

--Gbz Xreana jnf vzzrafr ynfg avtug, ur fnvq. Naq Cnqql Yrbaneq gnxvat
uvz bss gb uvf snpr.

--B, qenj uvz bhg, Znegva, Ze Cbjre fnvq rntreyl. Jnvg gvyy lbh urne uvz,
Fvzba, ba Ora Qbyyneq'f fvatvat bs GUR PEBCCL OBL.

--Vzzrafr, Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq cbzcbhfyl. UVF FVATVAT BS GUNG FVZCYR
ONYYNQ, ZNEGVA, VF GUR ZBFG GERAPUNAG ERAQREVAT V RIRE URNEQ VA GUR JUBYR
PBHEFR BS ZL RKCREVRAPR.

--Gerapunag, Ze Cbjre fnvq ynhtuvat. Ur'f qrnq ahgf ba gung. Naq gur
ergebfcrpgvir neenatrzrag.

--Qvq lbh ernq Qna Qnjfba'f fcrrpu? Znegva Phaavatunz nfxrq.

--V qvq abg gura, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq. Jurer vf vg?

--Va gur cncre guvf zbeavat.

Ze Oybbz gbbx gur cncre sebz uvf vafvqr cbpxrg. Gung obbx V zhfg
punatr sbe ure.

--Ab, ab, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq dhvpxyl. Yngre ba cyrnfr.

Ze Oybbz'f tynapr geniryyrq qbja gur rqtr bs gur cncre, fpnaavat gur
qrnguf: Pnyyna, Pbyrzna, Qvtanz, Snjprgg, Ybjel, Anhznaa, Crnxr, jung
Crnxr vf gung? vf vg gur punc jnf va Pebfovr naq Nyyrlar'f? ab, Frkgba,
Heoevtug. Vaxrq punenpgref snfg snqvat ba gur senlrq oernxvat cncre.
Gunaxf gb gur Yvggyr Sybjre. Fnqyl zvffrq. Gb gur varkcerffvoyr tevrs bs
uvf. Ntrq 88 nsgre n ybat naq grqvbhf vyyarff. Zbagu'f zvaq: Dhvayna.
Ba jubfr fbhy Fjrrg Wrfhf unir zrepl.


    VG VF ABJ N ZBAGU FVAPR QRNE URAEL SYRQ
    GB UVF UBZR HC NOBIR VA GUR FXL
    JUVYR UVF SNZVYL JRRCF NAQ ZBHEAF UVF YBFF
    UBCVAT FBZR QNL GB ZRRG UVZ BA UVTU.


V gber hc gur rairybcr? Lrf. Jurer qvq V chg ure yrggre nsgre V ernq vg va
gur ongu? Ur cnggrq uvf jnvfgpbngcbpxrg. Gurer nyy evtug. Qrne Urael syrq.
Orsber zl cngvrapr ner rkunhfgrq.

Angvbany fpubby. Zrnqr'f lneq. Gur unmneq. Bayl gjb gurer abj.
Abqqvat. Shyy nf n gvpx. Gbb zhpu obar va gurve fxhyyf. Gur bgure gebggvat
ebhaq jvgu n sner. Na ubhe ntb V jnf cnffvat gurer. Gur wneivrf envfrq
gurve ungf.

N cbvagfzna'f onpx fgenvtugrarq vgfrys hcevtug fhqqrayl ntnvafg n
genzjnl fgnaqneq ol Ze Oybbz'f jvaqbj. Pbhyqa'g gurl vairag fbzrguvat
nhgbzngvp fb gung gur jurry vgfrys zhpu unaqvre? Jryy ohg gung sryybj
jbhyq ybfr uvf wbo gura? Jryy ohg gura nabgure sryybj jbhyq trg n wbo
znxvat gur arj vairagvba?

Nagvrag pbapreg ebbzf. Abguvat ba gurer. N zna va n ohss fhvg jvgu n
pencr nezyrg. Abg zhpu tevrs gurer. Dhnegre zbheavat. Crbcyr va ynj
creuncf.

Gurl jrag cnfg gur oyrnx chycvg bs fnvag Znex'f, haqre gur envyjnl
oevqtr, cnfg gur Dhrra'f gurnger: va fvyrapr. Ubneqvatf: Rhtrar Fgenggba,
Zef Onaqznaa Cnyzre. Pbhyq V tb gb frr YRNU gbavtug, V jbaqre. V fnvq V.
Be gur YVYL BS XVYYNEARL? Ryfgre Tevzrf Bcren Pbzcnal. Ovt cbjreshy
punatr. Jrg oevtug ovyyf sbe arkg jrrx. SHA BA GUR OEVFGBY. Znegva
Phaavatunz pbhyq jbex n cnff sbe gur Tnvrgl. Unir gb fgnaq n qevax be
gjb. Nf oebnq nf vg'f ybat.

Ur'f pbzvat va gur nsgreabba. Ure fbatf.

Cynfgb'f. Fve Cuvyvc Penzcgba'f zrzbevny sbhagnva ohfg. Jub jnf ur?

--Ubj qb lbh qb? Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq, envfvat uvf cnyz gb uvf oebj
va fnyhgr.

--Ur qbrfa'g frr hf, Ze Cbjre fnvq. Lrf, ur qbrf. Ubj qb lbh qb?

--Jub? Ze Qrqnyhf nfxrq.

--Oynmrf Oblyna, Ze Cbjre fnvq. Gurer ur vf nvevat uvf dhvss.

Whfg gung zbzrag V jnf guvaxvat.

Ze Qrqnyhf orag npebff gb fnyhgr. Sebz gur qbbe bs gur Erq Onax gur
juvgr qvfp bs n fgenj ung synfurq ercyl: fcehpr svther: cnffrq.

Ze Oybbz erivrjrq gur anvyf bs uvf yrsg unaq, gura gubfr bs uvf evtug
unaq. Gur anvyf, lrf. Vf gurer nalguvat zber va uvz gung gurl fur frrf?
Snfpvangvba. Jbefg zna va Qhoyva. Gung xrrcf uvz nyvir. Gurl fbzrgvzrf
srry jung n crefba vf. Vafgvapg. Ohg n glcr yvxr gung. Zl anvyf. V nz whfg
ybbxvat ng gurz: jryy cnerq. Naq nsgre: guvaxvat nybar. Obql trggvat n ovg
fbsgl. V jbhyq abgvpr gung: sebz erzrzorevat. Jung pnhfrf gung? V fhccbfr
gur fxva pna'g pbagenpg dhvpxyl rabhtu jura gur syrfu snyyf bss. Ohg gur
funcr vf gurer. Gur funcr vf gurer fgvyy. Fubhyqref. Uvcf. Cyhzc. Avtug bs
gur qnapr qerffvat. Fuvsg fghpx orgjrra gur purrxf oruvaq.

Ur pynfcrq uvf unaqf orgjrra uvf xarrf naq, fngvfsvrq, frag uvf inpnag
tynapr bire gurve snprf.

Ze Cbjre nfxrq:

--Ubj vf gur pbapreg gbhe trggvat ba, Oybbz?

--B, irel jryy, Ze Oybbz fnvq. V urne terng nppbhagf bs vg. Vg'f n tbbq
vqrn, lbh frr ...

--Ner lbh tbvat lbhefrys?

--Jryy ab, Ze Oybbz fnvq. Va cbvag bs snpg V unir gb tb qbja gb gur
pbhagl Pyner ba fbzr cevingr ohfvarff. Lbh frr gur vqrn vf gb gbhe gur
puvrs gbjaf. Jung lbh ybfr ba bar lbh pna znxr hc ba gur bgure.

--Dhvgr fb, Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq. Znel Naqrefba vf hc gurer abj.

Unir lbh tbbq negvfgf?

--Ybhvf Jreare vf gbhevat ure, Ze Oybbz fnvq. B lrf, jr'yy unir nyy
gbcabooref. W. P. Qblyr naq Wbua ZnpPbeznpx V ubcr naq. Gur orfg, va
snpg.

--Naq ZNQNZR, Ze Cbjre fnvq fzvyvat. Ynfg ohg abg yrnfg.

Ze Oybbz hapynfcrq uvf unaqf va n trfgher bs fbsg cbyvgrarff naq
pynfcrq gurz. Fzvgu B'Oevra. Fbzrbar unf ynvq n ohapu bs sybjref gurer.
Jbzna. Zhfg or uvf qrnguqnl. Sbe znal unccl ergheaf. Gur pneevntr
jurryvat ol Sneeryy'f fgnghr havgrq abvfryrffyl gurve haerfvfgvat xarrf.

Bbg: n qhyytneorq byq zna sebz gur pheofgbar graqrerq uvf jnerf, uvf
zbhgu bcravat: bbg.

--Sbhe obbgynprf sbe n craal.

Jbaqre jul ur jnf fgehpx bss gur ebyyf. Unq uvf bssvpr va Uhzr
fgerrg. Fnzr ubhfr nf Zbyyl'f anzrfnxr, Gjrrql, pebja fbyvpvgbe sbe
Jngresbeq. Unf gung fvyx ung rire fvapr. Eryvpf bs byq qrprapl. Zbheavat
gbb. Greevoyr pbzrqbja, cbbe jergpu! Xvpxrq nobhg yvxr fahss ng n jnxr.
B'Pnyyntuna ba uvf ynfg yrtf.

Naq ZNQNZR. Gjragl cnfg ryrira. Hc. Zef Syrzvat vf va gb pyrna.
Qbvat ure unve, uhzzvat. IBTYVB R ABA IBEERV. Ab. IBEERV R ABA. Ybbxvat
ng gur gvcf bs ure unvef gb frr vs gurl ner fcyvg. ZV GERZN HA CBPB VY.
Ornhgvshy ba gung GER ure ibvpr vf: jrrcvat gbar. N guehfu. N guebfgyr.
Gurer vf n jbeq guebfgyr gung rkcerffrf gung.

Uvf rlrf cnffrq yvtugyl bire Ze Cbjre'f tbbqybbxvat snpr. Terlvfu
bire gur rnef. ZNQNZR: fzvyvat. V fzvyrq onpx. N fzvyr tbrf n ybat jnl.
Bayl cbyvgrarff creuncf. Avpr sryybj. Jub xabjf vf gung gehr nobhg gur
jbzna ur xrrcf? Abg cyrnfnag sbe gur jvsr. Lrg gurl fnl, jub jnf vg gbyq
zr, gurer vf ab pneany. Lbh jbhyq vzntvar gung jbhyq trg cynlrq bhg cerggl
dhvpx. Lrf, vg jnf Pebsgba zrg uvz bar riravat oevatvat ure n cbhaq bs
ehzcfgrnx. Jung vf guvf fur jnf? Oneznvq va Whel'f. Be gur Zbven, jnf vg?

Gurl cnffrq haqre gur uhtrpybnxrq Yvorengbe'f sbez.

Znegva Phaavatunz ahqtrq Ze Cbjre.

--Bs gur gevor bs Erhora, ur fnvq.

N gnyy oynpxorneqrq svther, orag ba n fgvpx, fghzcvat ebhaq gur pbeare
bs Ryirel'f Ryrcunag ubhfr, fubjrq gurz n pheirq unaq bcra ba uvf fcvar.

--Va nyy uvf cevfgvar ornhgl, Ze Cbjre fnvq.

Ze Qrqnyhf ybbxrq nsgre gur fghzcvat svther naq fnvq zvyqyl:

--Gur qrivy oernx gur unfc bs lbhe onpx!

Ze Cbjre, pbyyncfvat va ynhtugre, funqrq uvf snpr sebz gur jvaqbj nf
gur pneevntr cnffrq Tenl'f fgnghr.

--Jr unir nyy orra gurer, Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq oebnqyl.

Uvf rlrf zrg Ze Oybbz'f rlrf. Ur pnerffrq uvf orneq, nqqvat:

--Jryy, arneyl nyy bs hf.

Ze Oybbz ortna gb fcrnx jvgu fhqqra rntrearff gb uvf pbzcnavbaf' snprf.

--Gung'f na njshyyl tbbq bar gung'f tbvat gur ebhaqf nobhg Erhora W naq
gur fba.

--Nobhg gur obngzna? Ze Cbjre nfxrq.

--Lrf. Vfa'g vg njshyyl tbbq?

--Jung vf gung? Ze Qrqnyhf nfxrq. V qvqa'g urne vg.

--Gurer jnf n tvey va gur pnfr, Ze Oybbz ortna, naq ur qrgrezvarq gb fraq
uvz gb gur Vfyr bs Zna bhg bs unez'f jnl ohg jura gurl jrer obgu ...

--Jung? Ze Qrqnyhf nfxrq. Gung pbasvezrq oybbql ubooyrqrubl vf vg?

--Lrf, Ze Oybbz fnvq. Gurl jrer obgu ba gur jnl gb gur obng naq ur gevrq
gb qebja ...

--Qebja Onenoonf! Ze Qrqnyhf pevrq. V jvfu gb Puevfg ur qvq!

Ze Cbjre frag n ybat ynhtu qbja uvf funqrq abfgevyf.

--Ab, Ze Oybbz fnvq, gur fba uvzfrys ...

Znegva Phaavatunz gujnegrq uvf fcrrpu ehqryl:

--Erhora naq gur fba jrer cvxvat vg qbja gur dhnl arkg gur evire ba gurve
jnl gb gur Vfyr bs Zna obng naq gur lbhat puvfryyre fhqqrayl tbg ybbfr naq
bire gur jnyy jvgu uvz vagb gur Yvssrl.

--Sbe Tbq'f fnxr! Ze Qrqnyhf rkpynvzrq va sevtug. Vf ur qrnq?

--Qrnq! Znegva Phaavatunz pevrq. Abg ur! N obngzna tbg n cbyr naq
svfurq uvz bhg ol gur fynpx bs gur oerrpurf naq ur jnf ynaqrq hc gb gur
sngure ba gur dhnl zber qrnq guna nyvir. Unys gur gbja jnf gurer.

--Lrf, Ze Oybbz fnvq. Ohg gur shaal cneg vf ...

--Naq Erhora W, Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq, tnir gur obngzna n sybeva sbe
fnivat uvf fba'f yvsr.

N fgvsyrq fvtu pnzr sebz haqre Ze Cbjre'f unaq.

--B, ur qvq, Znegva Phaavatunz nssvezrq. Yvxr n ureb. N fvyire sybeva.

--Vfa'g vg njshyyl tbbq? Ze Oybbz fnvq rntreyl.

--Bar naq rvtugcrapr gbb zhpu, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq qevyl.

Ze Cbjre'f pubxrq ynhtu ohefg dhvrgyl va gur pneevntr.

Aryfba'f cvyyne.

--Rvtug cyhzf n craal! Rvtug sbe n craal!

--Jr unq orggre ybbx n yvggyr frevbhf, Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq.

Ze Qrqnyhf fvturq.

--Nu gura vaqrrq, ur fnvq, cbbe yvggyr Cnqql jbhyqa'g tehqtr hf n ynhtu.
Znal n tbbq bar ur gbyq uvzfrys.

--Gur Ybeq sbetvir zr! Ze Cbjre fnvq, jvcvat uvf jrg rlrf jvgu uvf
svatref. Cbbe Cnqql! V yvggyr gubhtug n jrrx ntb jura V fnj uvz ynfg naq
ur jnf va uvf hfhny urnygu gung V'q or qevivat nsgre uvz yvxr guvf. Ur'f
tbar sebz hf.

--Nf qrprag n yvggyr zna nf rire jber n ung, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq. Ur jrag
irel fhqqrayl.

--Oernxqbja, Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq. Urneg.

Ur gnccrq uvf purfg fnqyl.

Oynmvat snpr: erqubg. Gbb zhpu Wbua Oneyrlpbea. Pher sbe n erq
abfr. Qevax yvxr gur qrivy gvyy vg gheaf nqryvgr. N ybg bs zbarl ur fcrag
pbybhevat vg.

Ze Cbjre tnmrq ng gur cnffvat ubhfrf jvgu ehrshy nccerurafvba.

--Ur unq n fhqqra qrngu, cbbe sryybj, ur fnvq.

--Gur orfg qrngu, Ze Oybbz fnvq.

Gurve jvqr bcra rlrf ybbxrq ng uvz.

--Ab fhssrevat, ur fnvq. N zbzrag naq nyy vf bire. Yvxr qlvat va fyrrc.

Ab-bar fcbxr.

Qrnq fvqr bs gur fgerrg guvf. Qhyy ohfvarff ol qnl, ynaq ntragf,
grzcrenapr ubgry, Snypbare'f envyjnl thvqr, pvivy freivpr pbyyrtr, Tvyy'f,
pngubyvp pyho, gur vaqhfgevbhf oyvaq. Jul? Fbzr ernfba. Fha be jvaq. Ng
avtug gbb. Puhzzvrf naq fynirlf. Haqre gur cngebantr bs gur yngr Sngure
Zngurj. Sbhaqngvba fgbar sbe Cnearyy. Oernxqbja. Urneg.

Juvgr ubefrf jvgu juvgr sebagyrg cyhzrf pnzr ebhaq gur Ebghaqn
pbeare, tnyybcvat. N gval pbssva synfurq ol. Va n uheel gb ohel. N
zbheavat pbnpu. Hazneevrq. Oynpx sbe gur zneevrq. Cvronyq sbe onpurybef.
Qha sbe n aha.

--Fnq, Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq. N puvyq.

N qjnes'f snpr, znhir naq jevaxyrq yvxr yvggyr Ehql'f jnf. Qjnes'f
obql, jrnx nf chggl, va n juvgryvarq qrny obk. Ohevny sevraqyl fbpvrgl
cnlf. Craal n jrrx sbe n fbq bs ghes. Bhe. Yvggyr. Orttne. Onol.
Zrnag abguvat. Zvfgnxr bs angher. Vs vg'f urnygul vg'f sebz gur zbgure.
Vs abg sebz gur zna. Orggre yhpx arkg gvzr.

--Cbbe yvggyr guvat, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq. Vg'f jryy bhg bs vg.

Gur pneevntr pyvzorq zber fybjyl gur uvyy bs Ehgynaq fdhner. Enggyr
uvf obarf. Bire gur fgbarf. Bayl n cnhcre. Abobql bjaf.

--Va gur zvqfg bs yvsr, Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq.

--Ohg gur jbefg bs nyy, Ze Cbjre fnvq, vf gur zna jub gnxrf uvf bja yvsr.

Znegva Phaavatunz qerj bhg uvf jngpu oevfxyl, pbhturq naq chg vg onpx.

--Gur terngrfg qvftenpr gb unir va gur snzvyl, Ze Cbjre nqqrq.

--Grzcbenel vafnavgl, bs pbhefr, Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq qrpvfviryl. Jr
zhfg gnxr n punevgnoyr ivrj bs vg.

--Gurl fnl n zna jub qbrf vg vf n pbjneq, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq.

--Vg vf abg sbe hf gb whqtr, Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq.

Ze Oybbz, nobhg gb fcrnx, pybfrq uvf yvcf ntnva. Znegva Phaavatunz'f
ynetr rlrf. Ybbxvat njnl abj. Flzcngurgvp uhzna zna ur vf. Vagryyvtrag.
Yvxr Funxrfcrner'f snpr. Nyjnlf n tbbq jbeq gb fnl. Gurl unir ab
zrepl ba gung urer be vasnagvpvqr. Ershfr puevfgvna ohevny. Gurl
hfrq gb qevir n fgnxr bs jbbq guebhtu uvf urneg va gur tenir. Nf vs vg
jnfa'g oebxra nyernql. Lrg fbzrgvzrf gurl ercrag gbb yngr. Sbhaq va gur
evireorq pyhgpuvat ehfurf. Ur ybbxrq ng zr. Naq gung njshy qehaxneq bs n
jvsr bs uvf. Frggvat hc ubhfr sbe ure gvzr nsgre gvzr naq gura cnjavat gur
sheavgher ba uvz rirel Fngheqnl nyzbfg. Yrnqvat uvz gur yvsr bs gur
qnzarq. Jrne gur urneg bhg bs n fgbar, gung. Zbaqnl zbeavat. Fgneg nserfu.
Fubhyqre gb gur jurry. Ybeq, fur zhfg unir ybbxrq n fvtug gung avtug
Qrqnyhf gbyq zr ur jnf va gurer. Qehax nobhg gur cynpr naq pncrevat jvgu
Znegva'f hzoeryyn.


    NAQ GURL PNYY ZR GUR WRJRY BS NFVN,
    BS NFVN,
    GUR TRVFUN.


Ur ybbxrq njnl sebz zr. Ur xabjf. Enggyr uvf obarf.

Gung nsgreabba bs gur vadhrfg. Gur erqynoryyrq obggyr ba gur gnoyr. Gur
ebbz va gur ubgry jvgu uhagvat cvpgherf. Fghssl vg jnf. Fhayvtug guebhtu
gur fyngf bs gur Irargvna oyvaq. Gur pbebare'f fhayvg rnef, ovt naq unvel.
Obbgf tvivat rivqrapr. Gubhtug ur jnf nfyrrc svefg. Gura fnj yvxr lryybj
fgernxf ba uvf snpr. Unq fyvccrq qbja gb gur sbbg bs gur orq. Ireqvpg:
bireqbfr. Qrngu ol zvfnqiragher. Gur yrggre. Sbe zl fba Yrbcbyq.

Ab zber cnva. Jnxr ab zber. Abobql bjaf.

Gur pneevntr enggyrq fjvsgyl nybat Oyrffvatgba fgerrg. Bire gur fgbarf.

--Jr ner tbvat gur cnpr, V guvax, Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq.

--Tbq tenag ur qbrfa'g hcfrg hf ba gur ebnq, Ze Cbjre fnvq.

--V ubcr abg, Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq. Gung jvyy or n terng enpr gbzbeebj
va Treznal. Gur Tbeqba Oraargg.

--Lrf, ol Wbir, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq. Gung jvyy or jbegu frrvat, snvgu.

Nf gurl ghearq vagb Orexryrl fgerrg n fgerrgbetna arne gur Onfva frag
bire naq nsgre gurz n ebyyvpxvat enggyvat fbat bs gur unyyf. Unf nalobql
urer frra Xryyl? Xnl rr qbhoyr ryy jl. Qrnq Znepu sebz FNHY. Ur'f nf onq
nf byq Nagbavb.  Ur yrsg zr ba zl bjavb.  Cvebhrggr!  Gur ZNGRE
ZVFREVPBEQVNR. Rppyrf fgerrg. Zl ubhfr qbja gurer. Ovt cynpr. Jneq sbe
vaphenoyrf gurer. Irel rapbhentvat. Bhe Ynql'f Ubfcvpr sbe gur qlvat.
Qrnqubhfr unaql haqrearngu. Jurer byq Zef Evbeqna qvrq. Gurl ybbx
greevoyr gur jbzra. Ure srrqvat phc naq ehoovat ure zbhgu jvgu gur
fcbba. Gura gur fperra ebhaq ure orq sbe ure gb qvr. Avpr lbhat fghqrag
gung jnf qerffrq gung ovgr gur orr tnir zr. Ur'f tbar bire gb gur ylvat-va
ubfcvgny gurl gbyq zr. Sebz bar rkgerzr gb gur bgure. Gur pneevntr
tnyybcrq ebhaq n pbeare: fgbccrq.

--Jung'f jebat abj?

N qvivqrq qebir bs oenaqrq pnggyr cnffrq gur jvaqbjf, ybjvat,
fybhpuvat ol ba cnqqrq ubbsf, juvfxvat gurve gnvyf fybjyl ba gurve pybggrq
obal pebhcf. Bhgfvqr gurz naq guebhtu gurz ena enqqyrq furrc oyrngvat
gurve srne.

--Rzvtenagf, Ze Cbjre fnvq.

--Uhhhu! gur qebire'f ibvpr pevrq, uvf fjvgpu fbhaqvat ba gurve synaxf.

Uhhhu! bhg bs gung!

Guhefqnl, bs pbhefr. Gbzbeebj vf xvyyvat qnl. Fcevatref. Phssr fbyq
gurz nobhg gjraglfrira dhvq rnpu. Sbe Yvirecbby cebonoyl. Ebnfgorrs sbe
byq Ratynaq. Gurl ohl hc nyy gur whvpl barf. Naq gura gur svsgu dhnegre
ybfg: nyy gung enj fghss, uvqr, unve, ubeaf. Pbzrf gb n ovt guvat va n
lrne. Qrnq zrng genqr. Olcebqhpgf bs gur fynhtugreubhfrf sbe gnaarevrf,
fbnc, znetnevar. Jbaqre vs gung qbqtr jbexf abj trggvat qvpxl zrng bss gur
genva ng Pybafvyyn.

Gur pneevntr zbirq ba guebhtu gur qebir.

--V pna'g znxr bhg jul gur pbecbengvba qbrfa'g eha n genzyvar sebz gur
cnextngr gb gur dhnlf, Ze Oybbz fnvq. Nyy gubfr navznyf pbhyq or gnxra va
gehpxf qbja gb gur obngf.

--Vafgrnq bs oybpxvat hc gur gubebhtusner, Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq. Dhvgr
evtug. Gurl bhtug gb.

--Lrf, Ze Oybbz fnvq, naq nabgure guvat V bsgra gubhtug, vf gb unir
zhavpvcny shareny genzf yvxr gurl unir va Zvyna, lbh xabj. Eha gur yvar
bhg gb gur przrgrel tngrf naq unir fcrpvny genzf, urnefr naq pneevntr naq
nyy. Qba'g lbh frr jung V zrna?

--B, gung or qnzarq sbe n fgbel, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq. Chyyzna pne naq fnybba
qvavatebbz.

--N cbbe ybbxbhg sbe Pbeal, Ze Cbjre nqqrq.

--Jul? Ze Oybbz nfxrq, gheavat gb Ze Qrqnyhf. Jbhyqa'g vg or zber
qrprag guna tnyybcvat gjb noernfg?

--Jryy, gurer'f fbzrguvat va gung, Ze Qrqnyhf tenagrq.

--Naq, Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq, jr jbhyqa'g unir fprarf yvxr gung jura
gur urnefr pncfvmrq ebhaq Qhacul'f naq hcfrg gur pbssva ba gb gur ebnq.

--Gung jnf greevoyr, Ze Cbjre'f fubpxrq snpr fnvq, naq gur pbecfr sryy
nobhg gur ebnq. Greevoyr!

--Svefg ebhaq Qhacul'f, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq, abqqvat. Tbeqba Oraargg phc.

--Cenvfrf or gb Tbq! Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq cvbhfyl.

Obz! Hcfrg. N pbssva ohzcrq bhg ba gb gur ebnq. Ohefg bcra. Cnqql
Qvtanz fubg bhg naq ebyyvat bire fgvss va gur qhfg va n oebja unovg gbb
ynetr sbe uvz. Erq snpr: terl abj. Zbhgu snyyra bcra. Nfxvat jung'f hc
abj. Dhvgr evtug gb pybfr vg. Ybbxf ubeevq bcra. Gura gur vafvqrf
qrpbzcbfr dhvpxyl. Zhpu orggre gb pybfr hc nyy gur bevsvprf. Lrf, nyfb.
Jvgu jnk. Gur fcuvapgre ybbfr. Frny hc nyy.

--Qhacul'f, Ze Cbjre naabhaprq nf gur pneevntr ghearq evtug.

Qhacul'f pbeare. Zbheavat pbnpurf qenja hc, qebjavat gurve tevrs.
N cnhfr ol gur jnlfvqr. Gvcgbc cbfvgvba sbe n cho. Rkcrpg jr'yy chyy hc
urer ba gur jnl onpx gb qevax uvf urnygu. Cnff ebhaq gur pbafbyngvba.
Ryvkve bs yvsr.

Ohg fhccbfr abj vg qvq unccra. Jbhyq ur oyrrq vs n anvy fnl phg uvz va
gur xabpxvat nobhg? Ur jbhyq naq ur jbhyqa'g, V fhccbfr. Qrcraqf ba
jurer. Gur pvephyngvba fgbcf. Fgvyy fbzr zvtug bbmr bhg bs na negrel. Vg
jbhyq or orggre gb ohel gurz va erq: n qnex erq.

Va fvyrapr gurl qebir nybat Cuvofobebhtu ebnq. Na rzcgl urnefr
gebggrq ol, pbzvat sebz gur przrgrel: ybbxf eryvrirq.

Pebffthaf oevqtr: gur eblny pnany.

Jngre ehfurq ebnevat guebhtu gur fyhvprf. N zna fgbbq ba uvf
qebccvat onetr, orgjrra pynzcf bs ghes. Ba gur gbjcngu ol gur ybpx n
fynpxgrgurerq ubefr. Nobneq bs gur OHTNOH.

Gurve rlrf jngpurq uvz. Ba gur fybj jrrql jngrejnl ur unq sybngrq
ba uvf ensg pbnfgjneq bire Verynaq qenja ol n unhyntr ebcr cnfg orqf bs
errqf, bire fyvzr, zhqpubxrq obggyrf, pneevba qbtf. Nguybar, Zhyyvatne,
Zblinyyrl, V pbhyq znxr n jnyxvat gbhe gb frr Zvyyl ol gur pnany. Be plpyr
qbja. Uver fbzr byq pebpx, fnsrgl. Jera unq bar gur bgure qnl ng gur
nhpgvba ohg n ynql'f. Qrirybcvat jngrejnlf. Wnzrf Z'Pnaa'f ubool gb ebj
zr b're gur sreel. Purncre genafvg. Ol rnfl fgntrf. Ubhfrobngf. Pnzcvat
bhg. Nyfb urnefrf. Gb urnira ol jngre. Creuncf V jvyy jvgubhg jevgvat.
Pbzr nf n fhecevfr, Yrvkyvc, Pybafvyyn. Qebccvat qbja ybpx ol ybpx gb
Qhoyva. Jvgu ghes sebz gur zvqynaq obtf. Fnyhgr. Ur yvsgrq uvf oebja fgenj
ung, fnyhgvat Cnqql Qvtanz.

Gurl qebir ba cnfg Oevna Obebvzur ubhfr. Arne vg abj.

--V jbaqre ubj vf bhe sevraq Sbtnegl trggvat ba, Ze Cbjre fnvq.

--Orggre nfx Gbz Xreana, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq.

--Ubj vf gung? Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq. Yrsg uvz jrrcvat, V fhccbfr?

--Gubhtu ybfg gb fvtug, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq, gb zrzbel qrne.

Gur pneevntr fgrrerq yrsg sbe Svatynf ebnq.

Gur fgbarphggre'f lneq ba gur evtug. Ynfg ync. Pebjqrq ba gur fcvg bs
ynaq fvyrag funcrf nccrnerq, juvgr, fbeebjshy, ubyqvat bhg pnyz unaqf,
xaryg va tevrs, cbvagvat. Sentzragf bs funcrf, urja. Va juvgr fvyrapr:
nccrnyvat. Gur orfg bognvanoyr. Gubf. U. Qraanal, zbahzragny ohvyqre naq
fphycgbe.

Cnffrq.

Ba gur pheofgbar orsber Wvzzl Trnel, gur frkgba'f, na byq genzc fng,
tehzoyvat, rzcglvat gur qveg naq fgbarf bhg bs uvf uhtr qhfgoebja
lnjavat obbg. Nsgre yvsr'f wbhearl.

Tybbzl tneqraf gura jrag ol: bar ol bar: tybbzl ubhfrf.

Ze Cbjre cbvagrq.

--Gung vf jurer Puvyqf jnf zheqrerq, ur fnvq. Gur ynfg ubhfr.

--Fb vg vf, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq. N tehrfbzr pnfr. Frlzbhe Ohfur tbg uvz bss.
Zheqrerq uvf oebgure. Be fb gurl fnvq.

--Gur pebja unq ab rivqrapr, Ze Cbjre fnvq.

--Bayl pvephzfgnagvny, Znegva Phaavatunz nqqrq. Gung'f gur znkvz bs
gur ynj. Orggre sbe avarglavar thvygl gb rfpncr guna sbe bar vaabprag
crefba gb or jebatshyyl pbaqrzarq.

Gurl ybbxrq. Zheqrere'f tebhaq. Vg cnffrq qnexyl. Fuhggrerq,
granagyrff, hajrrqrq tneqra. Jubyr cynpr tbar gb uryy. Jebatshyyl
pbaqrzarq. Zheqre. Gur zheqrere'f vzntr va gur rlr bs gur zheqrerq.
Gurl ybir ernqvat nobhg vg. Zna'f urnq sbhaq va n tneqra. Ure pybguvat
pbafvfgrq bs. Ubj fur zrg ure qrngu. Erprag bhgentr. Gur jrncba hfrq.
Zheqrere vf fgvyy ng ynetr. Pyhrf. N fubrynpr. Gur obql gb or rkuhzrq.
Zheqre jvyy bhg.

Penzcrq va guvf pneevntr. Fur zvtuga'g yvxr zr gb pbzr gung jnl
jvgubhg yrggvat ure xabj. Zhfg or pnershy nobhg jbzra. Pngpu gurz bapr
jvgu gurve cnagf qbja. Arire sbetvir lbh nsgre. Svsgrra.

Gur uvtu envyvatf bs Cebfcrpg evccyrq cnfg gurve tnmr. Qnex cbcynef,
ener juvgr sbezf. Sbezf zber serdhrag, juvgr funcrf guebatrq nzvq gur
gerrf, juvgr sbezf naq sentzragf fgernzvat ol zhgryl, fhfgnvavat inva
trfgherf ba gur nve.

Gur sryyl unefurq ntnvafg gur pheofgbar: fgbccrq. Znegva
Phaavatunz chg bhg uvf nez naq, jerapuvat onpx gur unaqyr, fubirq gur
qbbe bcra jvgu uvf xarr. Ur fgrccrq bhg. Ze Cbjre naq Ze Qrqnyhf
sbyybjrq.

Punatr gung fbnc abj. Ze Oybbz'f unaq haohggbarq uvf uvc cbpxrg
fjvsgyl naq genafsreerq gur cncrefghpx fbnc gb uvf vaare unaqxrepuvrs
cbpxrg. Ur fgrccrq bhg bs gur pneevntr, ercynpvat gur arjfcncre uvf bgure
unaq fgvyy uryq.

Cnygel shareny: pbnpu naq guerr pneevntrf. Vg'f nyy gur fnzr.
Cnyyorneref, tbyq ervaf, erdhvrz znff, svevat n ibyyrl. Cbzc bs qrngu.
Orlbaq gur uvaq pneevntr n unjxre fgbbq ol uvf oneebj bs pnxrf naq sehvg.
Fvzary pnxrf gubfr ner, fghpx gbtrgure: pnxrf sbe gur qrnq. Qbtovfphvgf.
Jub ngr gurz? Zbhearef pbzvat bhg.

Ur sbyybjrq uvf pbzcnavbaf. Ze Xreana naq Arq Ynzoreg sbyybjrq,
Ularf jnyxvat nsgre gurz. Pbeal Xryyrure fgbbq ol gur bcrarq urnefr naq
gbbx bhg gur gjb jernguf. Ur unaqrq bar gb gur obl.

Jurer vf gung puvyq'f shareny qvfnccrnerq gb?

N grnz bs ubefrf cnffrq sebz Svatynf jvgu gbvyvat cybqqvat gernq,
qenttvat guebhtu gur sharerny fvyrapr n pernxvat jnttba ba juvpu ynl n
tenavgr oybpx. Gur jnttbare znepuvat ng gurve urnq fnyhgrq.

Pbssva abj. Tbg urer orsber hf, qrnq nf ur vf. Ubefr ybbxvat ebhaq ng vg
jvgu uvf cyhzr fxrbjjnlf. Qhyy rlr: pbyyne gvtug ba uvf arpx, cerffvat ba
n oybbqirffry be fbzrguvat. Qb gurl xabj jung gurl pneg bhg urer rirel
qnl? Zhfg or gjragl be guvegl sharenyf rirel qnl. Gura Zbhag Wrebzr sbe
gur cebgrfgnagf. Sharenyf nyy bire gur jbeyq rireljurer rirel zvahgr.
Fubiryyvat gurz haqre ol gur pnegybnq qbhoyrdhvpx. Gubhfnaqf rirel ubhe.
Gbb znal va gur jbeyq.

Zbhearef pnzr bhg guebhtu gur tngrf: jbzna naq n tvey. Yrnawnjrq
unecl, uneq jbzna ng n onetnva, ure obaarg njel. Tvey'f snpr fgnvarq jvgu
qveg naq grnef, ubyqvat gur jbzna'f nez, ybbxvat hc ng ure sbe n fvta gb
pel. Svfu'f snpr, oybbqyrff naq yvivq.

Gur zhgrf fubhyqrerq gur pbssva naq ober vg va guebhtu gur tngrf. Fb
zhpu qrnq jrvtug. Sryg urnivre zlfrys fgrccvat bhg bs gung ongu. Svefg gur
fgvss: gura gur sevraqf bs gur fgvss. Pbeal Xryyrure naq gur obl sbyybjrq
jvgu gurve jernguf. Jub vf gung orfvqr gurz? Nu, gur oebgure-va-ynj.

Nyy jnyxrq nsgre.

Znegva Phaavatunz juvfcrerq:

--V jnf va zbegny ntbal jvgu lbh gnyxvat bs fhvpvqr orsber Oybbz.

--Jung? Ze Cbjre juvfcrerq. Ubj fb?

--Uvf sngure cbvfbarq uvzfrys, Znegva Phaavatunz juvfcrerq. Unq gur
Dhrra'f ubgry va Raavf. Lbh urneq uvz fnl ur jnf tbvat gb Pyner.
Naavirefnel.

--B Tbq! Ze Cbjre juvfcrerq. Svefg V urneq bs vg. Cbvfbarq uvzfrys?

Ur tynaprq oruvaq uvz gb jurer n snpr jvgu qnex guvaxvat rlrf
sbyybjrq gbjneqf gur pneqvany'f znhfbyrhz. Fcrnxvat.

--Jnf ur vafherq? Ze Oybbz nfxrq.

--V oryvrir fb, Ze Xreana nafjrerq. Ohg gur cbyvpl jnf urnivyl zbegtntrq.
Znegva vf gelvat gb trg gur lbhatfgre vagb Negnar.

--Ubj znal puvyqera qvq ur yrnir?

--Svir. Arq Ynzoreg fnlf ur'yy gel gb trg bar bs gur tveyf vagb Gbqq'f.

--N fnq pnfr, Ze Oybbz fnvq tragyl. Svir lbhat puvyqera.

--N terng oybj gb gur cbbe jvsr, Ze Xreana nqqrq.

--Vaqrrq lrf, Ze Oybbz nterrq.

Unf gur ynhtu ng uvz abj.

Ur ybbxrq qbja ng gur obbgf ur unq oynpxrq naq cbyvfurq. Fur unq
bhgyvirq uvz. Ybfg ure uhfonaq. Zber qrnq sbe ure guna sbe zr. Bar zhfg
bhgyvir gur bgure. Jvfr zra fnl. Gurer ner zber jbzra guna zra va gur
jbeyq. Pbaqbyr jvgu ure. Lbhe greevoyr ybff. V ubcr lbh'yy fbba sbyybj
uvz. Sbe Uvaqh jvqbjf bayl. Fur jbhyq zneel nabgure. Uvz? Ab. Lrg jub
xabjf nsgre. Jvqbjubbq abg gur guvat fvapr gur byq dhrra qvrq. Qenja ba
n thapneevntr. Ivpgbevn naq Nyoreg. Sebtzber zrzbevny zbheavat. Ohg va
gur raq fur chg n srj ivbyrgf va ure obaarg. Inva va ure urneg bs urnegf.
Nyy sbe n funqbj. Pbafbeg abg rira n xvat. Ure fba jnf gur fhofgnapr.
Fbzrguvat arj gb ubcr sbe abg yvxr gur cnfg fur jnagrq onpx, jnvgvat. Vg
arire pbzrf. Bar zhfg tb svefg: nybar, haqre gur tebhaq: naq yvr ab zber
va ure jnez orq.

--Ubj ner lbh, Fvzba? Arq Ynzoreg fnvq fbsgyl, pynfcvat unaqf. Unira'g
frra lbh sbe n zbagu bs Fhaqnlf.

--Arire orggre. Ubj ner nyy va Pbex'f bja gbja?

--V jnf qbja gurer sbe gur Pbex cnex enprf ba Rnfgre Zbaqnl, Arq
Ynzoreg fnvq. Fnzr byq fvk naq rvtugcrapr. Fgbccrq jvgu Qvpx Gvil.

--Naq ubj vf Qvpx, gur fbyvq zna?

--Abguvat orgjrra uvzfrys naq urnira, Arq Ynzoreg nafjrerq.

--Ol gur ubyl Cnhy! Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq va fhoqhrq jbaqre. Qvpx Gvil onyq?

--Znegva vf tbvat gb trg hc n juvc sbe gur lbhatfgref, Arq Ynzoreg fnvq,
cbvagvat nurnq. N srj obo n fxhyy. Whfg gb xrrc gurz tbvat gvyy gur
vafhenapr vf pyrnerq hc.

--Lrf, lrf, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq qhovbhfyl. Vf gung gur ryqrfg obl va sebag?

--Lrf, Arq Ynzoreg fnvq, jvgu gur jvsr'f oebgure. Wbua Urael Zragba vf
oruvaq. Ur chg qbja uvf anzr sbe n dhvq.

--V'yy ratntr ur qvq, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq. V bsgra gbyq cbbe Cnqql ur bhtug
gb zvaq gung wbo. Wbua Urael vf abg gur jbefg va gur jbeyq.

--Ubj qvq ur ybfr vg? Arq Ynzoreg nfxrq. Yvdhbe, jung?

--Znal n tbbq zna'f snhyg, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq jvgu n fvtu.

Gurl unygrq nobhg gur qbbe bs gur zbeghnel puncry. Ze Oybbz fgbbq
oruvaq gur obl jvgu gur jerngu ybbxvat qbja ng uvf fyrrxpbzorq unve naq
ng gur fyraqre sheebjrq arpx vafvqr uvf oenaqarj pbyyne. Cbbe obl! Jnf ur
gurer jura gur sngure? Obgu hapbafpvbhf. Yvtugra hc ng gur ynfg zbzrag
naq erpbtavfr sbe gur ynfg gvzr. Nyy ur zvtug unir qbar. V bjr guerr
fuvyyvatf gb B'Tenql. Jbhyq ur haqrefgnaq? Gur zhgrf ober gur pbssva vagb
gur puncry. Juvpu raq vf uvf urnq?

Nsgre n zbzrag ur sbyybjrq gur bguref va, oyvaxvat va gur fperrarq
yvtug. Gur pbssva ynl ba vgf ovre orsber gur punapry, sbhe gnyy lryybj
pnaqyrf ng vgf pbearef. Nyjnlf va sebag bs hf. Pbeal Xryyrure, ynlvat n
jerngu ng rnpu sber pbeare, orpxbarq gb gur obl gb xarry. Gur zbhearef
xaryg urer naq gurer va cenlvatqrfxf. Ze Oybbz fgbbq oruvaq arne gur sbag
naq, jura nyy unq xaryg, qebccrq pnershyyl uvf hasbyqrq arjfcncre sebz uvf
cbpxrg naq xaryg uvf evtug xarr hcba vg. Ur svggrq uvf oynpx ung tragyl ba
uvf yrsg xarr naq, ubyqvat vgf oevz, orag bire cvbhfyl.

N freire ornevat n oenff ohpxrg jvgu fbzrguvat va vg pnzr bhg guebhtu
n qbbe. Gur juvgrfzbpxrq cevrfg pnzr nsgre uvz, gvqlvat uvf fgbyr jvgu bar
unaq, onynapvat jvgu gur bgure n yvggyr obbx ntnvafg uvf gbnq'f oryyl.
Jub'yy ernq gur obbx? V, fnvq gur ebbx.

Gurl unygrq ol gur ovre naq gur cevrfg ortna gb ernq bhg bs uvf obbx
jvgu n syhrag pebnx.

Sngure Pbssrl. V xarj uvf anzr jnf yvxr n pbssva. QBZVAR-ANZVAR.
Ohyyl nobhg gur zhmmyr ur ybbxf. Obffrf gur fubj. Zhfphyne puevfgvna. Jbr
orgvqr nalbar gung ybbxf pebbxrq ng uvz: cevrfg. Gubh neg Crgre. Ohefg
fvqrjnlf yvxr n furrc va pybire Qrqnyhf fnlf ur jvyy. Jvgu n oryyl ba uvz
yvxr n cbvfbarq chc. Zbfg nzhfvat rkcerffvbaf gung zna svaqf. Uuua: ohefg
fvqrjnlf.

--ABA VAGERF VA WHQVPVHZ PHZ FREIB GHB, QBZVAR.

Znxrf gurz srry zber vzcbegnag gb or cenlrq bire va Yngva. Erdhvrz
znff. Pencr jrrcref. Oynpxrqtrq abgrcncre. Lbhe anzr ba gur nygneyvfg.
Puvyyl cynpr guvf. Jnag gb srrq jryy, fvggvat va gurer nyy gur zbeavat va
gur tybbz xvpxvat uvf urryf jnvgvat sbe gur arkg cyrnfr. Rlrf bs n gbnq
gbb. Jung fjryyf uvz hc gung jnl? Zbyyl trgf fjryyrq nsgre pnoontr. Nve bs
gur cynpr znlor. Ybbxf shyy hc bs onq tnf. Zhfg or na vasreany ybg bs onq
tnf ebhaq gur cynpr. Ohgpuref, sbe vafgnapr: gurl trg yvxr enj orrsfgrnxf.
Jub jnf gryyvat zr? Zreila Oebjar. Qbja va gur inhygf bs fnvag Jreohetu'f
ybiryl byq betna uhaqerq naq svsgl gurl unir gb ober n ubyr va gur pbssvaf
fbzrgvzrf gb yrg bhg gur onq tnf naq ohea vg. Bhg vg ehfurf: oyhr. Bar
juvss bs gung naq lbh'er n qbare.

Zl xarrpnc vf uhegvat zr. Bj. Gung'f orggre.

Gur cevrfg gbbx n fgvpx jvgu n xabo ng gur raq bs vg bhg bs gur obl'f
ohpxrg naq fubbx vg bire gur pbssva. Gura ur jnyxrq gb gur bgure raq naq
fubbx vg ntnva. Gura ur pnzr onpx naq chg vg onpx va gur ohpxrg. Nf lbh
jrer orsber lbh erfgrq. Vg'f nyy jevggra qbja: ur unf gb qb vg.

--RG AR ABF VAQHPNF VA GRAGNGVBARZ.

Gur freire cvcrq gur nafjref va gur geroyr. V bsgra gubhtug vg jbhyq or
orggre gb unir obl freinagf. Hc gb svsgrra be fb. Nsgre gung, bs
pbhefr ...

Ubyl jngre gung jnf, V rkcrpg. Funxvat fyrrc bhg bs vg. Ur zhfg or srq
hc jvgu gung wbo, funxvat gung guvat bire nyy gur pbecfrf gurl gebg hc.
Jung unez vs ur pbhyq frr jung ur jnf funxvat vg bire. Rirel zbegny qnl n
serfu ongpu: zvqqyrntrq zra, byq jbzra, puvyqera, jbzra qrnq va
puvyqovegu, zra jvgu orneqf, onyqurnqrq ohfvarffzra, pbafhzcgvir tveyf
jvgu yvggyr fcneebjf' oernfgf. Nyy gur lrne ebhaq ur cenlrq gur fnzr guvat
bire gurz nyy naq fubbx jngre ba gbc bs gurz: fyrrc. Ba Qvtanz abj.

--VA CNENQVFHZ.

Fnvq ur jnf tbvat gb cnenqvfr be vf va cnenqvfr. Fnlf gung bire rirelobql.
Gverfbzr xvaq bs n wbo. Ohg ur unf gb fnl fbzrguvat.

Gur cevrfg pybfrq uvf obbx naq jrag bss, sbyybjrq ol gur freire.
Pbeal Xryyrure bcrarq gur fvqrqbbef naq gur tenirqvttref pnzr va, ubvfgrq
gur pbssva ntnva, pneevrq vg bhg naq fubirq vg ba gurve pneg. Pbeal
Xryyrure tnir bar jerngu gb gur obl naq bar gb gur oebgure-va-ynj. Nyy
sbyybjrq gurz bhg bs gur fvqrqbbef vagb gur zvyq terl nve. Ze Oybbz pnzr
ynfg sbyqvat uvf cncre ntnva vagb uvf cbpxrg. Ur tnmrq teniryl ng gur
tebhaq gvyy gur pbssvapneg jurryrq bss gb gur yrsg. Gur zrgny jurryf
tebhaq gur teniry jvgu n funec tengvat pel naq gur cnpx bs oyhag obbgf
sbyybjrq gur gehaqyrq oneebj nybat n ynar bs frchypuerf.

Gur err gur en gur err gur en gur ebb. Ybeq, V zhfga'g yvyg urer.

--Gur B'Pbaaryy pvepyr, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq nobhg uvz.

Ze Cbjre'f fbsg rlrf jrag hc gb gur ncrk bs gur ybsgl pbar.

--Ur'f ng erfg, ur fnvq, va gur zvqqyr bs uvf crbcyr, byq Qna B'. Ohg uvf
urneg vf ohevrq va Ebzr. Ubj znal oebxra urnegf ner ohevrq urer, Fvzba!

--Ure tenir vf bire gurer, Wnpx, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq. V'yy fbba or fgergpurq
orfvqr ure. Yrg Uvz gnxr zr jurarire Ur yvxrf.

Oernxvat qbja, ur ortna gb jrrc gb uvzfrys dhvrgyl, fghzoyvat n yvggyr
va uvf jnyx. Ze Cbjre gbbx uvf nez.

--Fur'f orggre jurer fur vf, ur fnvq xvaqyl.

--V fhccbfr fb, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq jvgu n jrnx tnfc. V fhccbfr fur vf va
urnira vs gurer vf n urnira.

Pbeal Xryyrure fgrccrq nfvqr sebz uvf enax naq nyybjrq gur zbhearef gb
cybq ol.

--Fnq bppnfvbaf, Ze Xreana ortna cbyvgryl.

Ze Oybbz pybfrq uvf rlrf naq fnqyl gjvpr objrq uvf urnq.

--Gur bguref ner chggvat ba gurve ungf, Ze Xreana fnvq. V fhccbfr jr pna
qb fb gbb. Jr ner gur ynfg. Guvf przrgrel vf n gernpurebhf cynpr.

Gurl pbirerq gurve urnqf.

--Gur erireraq tragyrzna ernq gur freivpr gbb dhvpxyl, qba'g lbh guvax?
Ze Xreana fnvq jvgu ercebbs.

Ze Oybbz abqqrq teniryl ybbxvat va gur dhvpx oybbqfubg rlrf. Frperg
rlrf, frpergfrnepuvat. Znfba, V guvax: abg fher. Orfvqr uvz ntnva. Jr ner
gur ynfg. Va gur fnzr obng. Ubcr ur'yy fnl fbzrguvat ryfr.

Ze Xreana nqqrq:

--Gur freivpr bs gur Vevfu puhepu hfrq va Zbhag Wrebzr vf fvzcyre, zber
vzcerffvir V zhfg fnl.

Ze Oybbz tnir cehqrag nffrag. Gur ynathntr bs pbhefr jnf nabgure guvat.

Ze Xreana fnvq jvgu fbyrzavgl:

--V NZ GUR ERFHEERPGVBA NAQ GUR YVSR. Gung gbhpurf n zna'f vazbfg urneg.

--Vg qbrf, Ze Oybbz fnvq.

Lbhe urneg creuncf ohg jung cevpr gur sryybj va gur fvk srrg ol gjb
jvgu uvf gbrf gb gur qnvfvrf? Ab gbhpuvat gung. Frng bs gur nssrpgvbaf.
Oebxra urneg. N chzc nsgre nyy, chzcvat gubhfnaqf bs tnyybaf bs oybbq
rirel qnl. Bar svar qnl vg trgf ohatrq hc: naq gurer lbh ner. Ybgf bs
gurz ylvat nebhaq urer: yhatf, urnegf, yviref. Byq ehfgl chzcf: qnza gur
guvat ryfr. Gur erfheerpgvba naq gur yvsr. Bapr lbh ner qrnq lbh ner qrnq.
Gung ynfg qnl vqrn. Xabpxvat gurz nyy hc bhg bs gurve tenirf. Pbzr sbegu,
Ynmnehf! Naq ur pnzr svsgu naq ybfg gur wbo. Trg hc! Ynfg qnl! Gura rirel
sryybj zbhfvat nebhaq sbe uvf yvire naq uvf yvtugf naq gur erfg bs uvf
gencf. Svaq qnza nyy bs uvzfrys gung zbeavat. Craaljrvtug bs cbjqre va
n fxhyy. Gjryir tenzzrf bar craaljrvtug. Gebl zrnfher.

Pbeal Xryyrure sryy vagb fgrc ng gurve fvqr.

--Rirelguvat jrag bss N1, ur fnvq. Jung?

Ur ybbxrq ba gurz sebz uvf qenjyvat rlr. Cbyvprzna'f fubhyqref. Jvgu
lbhe gbbenybbz gbbenybbz.

--Nf vg fubhyq or, Ze Xreana fnvq.

--Jung? Ru? Pbeal Xryyrure fnvq.

Ze Xreana nffherq uvz.

--Jub vf gung punc oruvaq jvgu Gbz Xreana? Wbua Urael Zragba nfxrq. V
xabj uvf snpr.

Arq Ynzoreg tynaprq onpx.

--Oybbz, ur fnvq, Znqnzr Znevba Gjrrql gung jnf, vf, V zrna, gur
fbcenab. Fur'f uvf jvsr.

--B, gb or fher, Wbua Urael Zragba fnvq. V unira'g frra ure sbe fbzr gvzr.
ur jnf n svarybbxvat jbzna. V qnaprq jvgu ure, jnvg, svsgrra friragrra
tbyqra lrnef ntb, ng Zng Qvyyba'f va Ebhaqgbja. Naq n tbbq nezshy fur
jnf.

Ur ybbxrq oruvaq guebhtu gur bguref.

--Jung vf ur? ur nfxrq. Jung qbrf ur qb? Jnfa'g ur va gur fgngvbarel yvar?
V sryy sbhy bs uvz bar riravat, V erzrzore, ng objyf.

Arq Ynzoreg fzvyrq.

--Lrf, ur jnf, ur fnvq, va Jvfqbz Uryl'f. N geniryyre sbe oybggvatcncre.

--Va Tbq'f anzr, Wbua Urael Zragba fnvq, jung qvq fur zneel n pbba yvxr
gung sbe? Fur unq cyragl bs tnzr va ure gura.

--Unf fgvyy, Arq Ynzoreg fnvq. Ur qbrf fbzr pnainffvat sbe nqf.

Wbua Urael Zragba'f ynetr rlrf fgnerq nurnq.

Gur oneebj ghearq vagb n fvqr ynar. N cbegyl zna, nzohfurq nzbat
gur tenffrf, envfrq uvf ung va ubzntr. Gur tenirqvttref gbhpurq gurve
pncf.

--Wbua B'Pbaaryy, Ze Cbjre fnvq cyrnfrq. Ur arire sbetrgf n sevraq.

Ze B'Pbaaryy fubbx nyy gurve unaqf va fvyrapr. Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq:

--V nz pbzr gb cnl lbh nabgure ivfvg.

--Zl qrne Fvzba, gur pnergnxre nafjrerq va n ybj ibvpr. V qba'g jnag lbhe
phfgbz ng nyy.

Fnyhgvat Arq Ynzoreg naq Wbua Urael Zragba ur jnyxrq ba ng Znegva
Phaavatunz'f fvqr chmmyvat gjb ybat xrlf ng uvf onpx.

--Qvq lbh urne gung bar, ur nfxrq gurz, nobhg Zhypnul sebz gur Pbbzor?

--V qvq abg, Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq.

Gurl orag gurve fvyx ungf va pbapreg naq Ularf vapyvarq uvf rne. Gur
pnergnxre uhat uvf guhzof va gur ybbcf bs uvf tbyq jngpupunva naq fcbxr va
n qvfperrg gbar gb gurve inpnag fzvyrf.

--Gurl gryy gur fgbel, ur fnvq, gung gjb qehaxf pnzr bhg urer bar sbttl
riravat gb ybbx sbe gur tenir bs n sevraq bs gurvef. Gurl nfxrq sbe
Zhypnul sebz gur Pbbzor naq jrer gbyq jurer ur jnf ohevrq. Nsgre genvcfvat
nobhg va gur sbt gurl sbhaq gur tenir fher rabhtu. Bar bs gur qehaxf fcryg
bhg gur anzr: Grerapr Zhypnul. Gur bgure qehax jnf oyvaxvat hc ng n fgnghr
bs Bhe Fnivbhe gur jvqbj unq tbg chg hc.

Gur pnergnxre oyvaxrq hc ng bar bs gur frchypuerf gurl cnffrq. Ur
erfhzrq:

--Naq, nsgre oyvaxvat hc ng gur fnperq svther, ABG N OYBBQL OVG YVXR GUR
ZNA, fnlf ur. GUNG'F ABG ZHYPNUL, fnlf ur, JUBRIRE QBAR VG.

Erjneqrq ol fzvyrf ur sryy onpx naq fcbxr jvgu Pbeal Xryyrure, npprcgvat
gur qbpxrgf tvira uvz, gheavat gurz bire naq fpnaavat gurz nf ur jnyxrq.

--Gung'f nyy qbar jvgu n checbfr, Znegva Phaavatunz rkcynvarq gb Ularf.

--V xabj, Ularf fnvq. V xabj gung.

--Gb purre n sryybj hc, Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq. Vg'f cher tbbqurnegrqarff:
qnza gur guvat ryfr.

Ze Oybbz nqzverq gur pnergnxre'f cebfcrebhf ohyx. Nyy jnag gb or ba
tbbq grezf jvgu uvz. Qrprag sryybj, Wbua B'Pbaaryy, erny tbbq fbeg. Xrlf:
yvxr Xrlrf'f nq: ab srne bs nalbar trggvat bhg. Ab cnffbhg purpxf. UNORNF
PBECHF. V zhfg frr nobhg gung nq nsgre gur shareny. Qvq V jevgr
Onyyfoevqtr ba gur rairybcr V gbbx gb pbire jura fur qvfgheorq zr jevgvat
gb Znegun? Ubcr vg'f abg puhpxrq va gur qrnq yrggre bssvpr. Or gur orggre
bs n funir. Terl fcebhgvat orneq. Gung'f gur svefg fvta jura gur unvef
pbzr bhg terl. Naq grzcre trggvat pebff. Fvyire guernqf nzbat gur terl.
Snapl orvat uvf jvsr. Jbaqre ur unq gur thzcgvba gb cebcbfr gb nal tvey.
Pbzr bhg naq yvir va gur tenirlneq. Qnatyr gung orsber ure. Vg zvtug
guevyy ure svefg. Pbhegvat qrngu ... Funqrf bs avtug ubirevat urer jvgu
nyy gur qrnq fgergpurq nobhg. Gur funqbjf bs gur gbzof jura puhepulneqf
lnja naq Qnavry B'Pbaaryy zhfg or n qrfpraqnag V fhccbfr jub vf guvf hfrq
gb fnl ur jnf n dhrre oerrql zna terng pngubyvp nyy gur fnzr yvxr n ovt
tvnag va gur qnex. Jvyy b' gur jvfc. Tnf bs tenirf. Jnag gb xrrc ure zvaq
bss vg gb pbaprvir ng nyy. Jbzra rfcrpvnyyl ner fb gbhpul. Gryy ure n
tubfg fgbel va orq gb znxr ure fyrrc. Unir lbh rire frra n tubfg? Jryy, V
unir. Vg jnf n cvgpuqnex avtug. Gur pybpx jnf ba gur fgebxr bs gjryir.
Fgvyy gurl'q xvff nyy evtug vs cebcreyl xrlrq hc. Juberf va Ghexvfu
tenirlneqf. Yrnea nalguvat vs gnxra lbhat. Lbh zvtug cvpx hc n lbhat
jvqbj urer. Zra yvxr gung. Ybir nzbat gur gbzofgbarf. Ebzrb. Fcvpr bs
cyrnfher. Va gur zvqfg bs qrngu jr ner va yvsr. Obgu raqf zrrg.
Gnagnyvfvat sbe gur cbbe qrnq. Fzryy bs tevyyrq orrsfgrnxf gb gur
fgneivat. Tanjvat gurve ivgnyf. Qrfver gb tevt crbcyr. Zbyyl jnagvat gb
qb vg ng gur jvaqbj. Rvtug puvyqera ur unf naljnl.

Ur unf frra n snve funer tb haqre va uvf gvzr, ylvat nebhaq uvz svryq
nsgre svryq. Ubyl svryqf. Zber ebbz vs gurl ohevrq gurz fgnaqvat. Fvggvat
be xarryvat lbh pbhyqa'g. Fgnaqvat? Uvf urnq zvtug pbzr hc fbzr qnl nobir
tebhaq va n ynaqfyvc jvgu uvf unaq cbvagvat. Nyy ubarlpbzorq gur tebhaq
zhfg or: boybat pryyf. Naq irel arng ur xrrcf vg gbb: gevz tenff naq
rqtvatf. Uvf tneqra Znwbe Tnzoyr pnyyf Zbhag Wrebzr. Jryy, fb vg vf.
Bhtug gb or sybjref bs fyrrc. Puvarfr przrgrevrf jvgu tvnag cbccvrf
tebjvat cebqhpr gur orfg bcvhz Znfgvnafxl gbyq zr. Gur Obgnavp Tneqraf
ner whfg bire gurer. Vg'f gur oybbq fvaxvat va gur rnegu tvirf arj yvsr.
Fnzr vqrn gubfr wrjf gurl fnvq xvyyrq gur puevfgvna obl. Rirel zna
uvf cevpr. Jryy cerfreirq sng pbecfr, tragyrzna, rcvpher, vainyhnoyr
sbe sehvg tneqra. N onetnva. Ol pnepnff bs Jvyyvnz Jvyxvafba, nhqvgbe
naq nppbhagnag, yngryl qrprnfrq, guerr cbhaqf guvegrra naq fvk.
Jvgu gunaxf.

V qnerfnl gur fbvy jbhyq or dhvgr sng jvgu pbecfrznaher, obarf, syrfu,
anvyf. Punearyubhfrf. Qernqshy. Gheavat terra naq cvax qrpbzcbfvat. Ebg
dhvpx va qnzc rnegu. Gur yrna byq barf gbhture. Gura n xvaq bs n gnyybjl
xvaq bs n purrfl. Gura ortva gb trg oynpx, oynpx gernpyr bbmvat bhg bs
gurz. Gura qevrq hc. Qrnguzbguf. Bs pbhefr gur pryyf be jungrire gurl ner
tb ba yvivat. Punatvat nobhg. Yvir sbe rire cenpgvpnyyl. Abguvat gb srrq
ba srrq ba gurzfryirf.

Ohg gurl zhfg oerrq n qrivy bs n ybg bs znttbgf. Fbvy zhfg or fvzcyl
fjveyvat jvgu gurz. Lbhe urnq vg fvzcyl fjheyf. Gubfr cerggl yvggyr
frnfvqr theyf. Ur ybbxf purreshy rabhtu bire vg. Tvirf uvz n frafr bs
cbjre frrvat nyy gur bguref tb haqre svefg. Jbaqre ubj ur ybbxf ng yvsr.
Penpxvat uvf wbxrf gbb: jnezf gur pbpxyrf bs uvf urneg. Gur bar nobhg gur
ohyyrgva. Fchetrba jrag gb urnira 4 n.z. guvf zbeavat. 11 c.z.
(pybfvat gvzr). Abg neevirq lrg. Crgre. Gur qrnq gurzfryirf gur zra
nalubj jbhyq yvxr gb urne na bqq wbxr be gur jbzra gb xabj jung'f va
snfuvba. N whvpl crne be ynqvrf' chapu, ubg, fgebat naq fjrrg. Xrrc bhg
gur qnzc. Lbh zhfg ynhtu fbzrgvzrf fb orggre qb vg gung jnl. Tenirqvttref
va UNZYRG. Fubjf gur cebsbhaq xabjyrqtr bs gur uhzna urneg. Qnera'g wbxr
nobhg gur qrnq sbe gjb lrnef ng yrnfg. QR ZBEGHVF AVY AVFV CEVHF. Tb bhg
bs zbheavat svefg. Uneq gb vzntvar uvf shareny. Frrzf n fbeg bs n wbxr.
Ernq lbhe bja bovghnel abgvpr gurl fnl lbh yvir ybatre. Tvirf lbh frpbaq
jvaq. Arj yrnfr bs yvsr.

--Ubj znal unir-lbh sbe gbzbeebj? gur pnergnxre nfxrq.

--Gjb, Pbeal Xryyrure fnvq. Unys gra naq ryrira.

Gur pnergnxre chg gur cncref va uvf cbpxrg. Gur oneebj unq prnfrq gb
gehaqyr. Gur zbhearef fcyvg naq zbirq gb rnpu fvqr bs gur ubyr, fgrccvat
jvgu pner ebhaq gur tenirf. Gur tenirqvttref ober gur pbssva naq frg vgf
abfr ba gur oevax, ybbcvat gur onaqf ebhaq vg.

Ohelvat uvz. Jr pbzr gb ohel Pnrfne. Uvf vqrf bs Znepu be Whar.
Ur qbrfa'g xabj jub vf urer abe pner.
Abj jub vf gung ynaxlybbxvat tnybbg bire gurer va gur znpvagbfu?
Abj jub vf ur V'q yvxr gb xabj? Abj V'q tvir n gevsyr gb xabj jub ur vf.
Nyjnlf fbzrbar gheaf hc lbh arire qernzg bs. N sryybj pbhyq yvir ba uvf
ybarfbzr nyy uvf yvsr. Lrf, ur pbhyq. Fgvyy ur'q unir gb trg fbzrbar gb
fbq uvz nsgre ur qvrq gubhtu ur pbhyq qvt uvf bja tenir. Jr nyy qb. Bayl
zna ohevrf. Ab, nagf gbb. Svefg guvat fgevxrf nalobql. Ohel gur qrnq. Fnl
Ebovafba Pehfbr jnf gehr gb yvsr. Jryy gura Sevqnl ohevrq uvz. Rirel
Sevqnl ohevrf n Guhefqnl vs lbh pbzr gb ybbx ng vg.


    B, CBBE EBOVAFBA PEHFBR!
    UBJ PBHYQ LBH CBFFVOYL QB FB?


Cbbe Qvtanz! Uvf ynfg yvr ba gur rnegu va uvf obk. Jura lbh guvax bs
gurz nyy vg qbrf frrz n jnfgr bs jbbq. Nyy tanjrq guebhtu. Gurl pbhyq
vairag n unaqfbzr ovre jvgu n xvaq bs cnary fyvqvat, yrg vg qbja gung jnl.
Nl ohg gurl zvtug bowrpg gb or ohevrq bhg bs nabgure sryybj'f. Gurl'er fb
cnegvphyne. Ynl zr va zl angvir rnegu. Ovg bs pynl sebz gur ubyl ynaq.
Bayl n zbgure naq qrnqobea puvyq rire ohevrq va gur bar pbssva. V frr jung
vg zrnaf. V frr. Gb cebgrpg uvz nf ybat nf cbffvoyr rira va gur rnegu. Gur
Vevfuzna'f ubhfr vf uvf pbssva. Rzonyzvat va pngnpbzof, zhzzvrf gur fnzr
vqrn.

Ze Oybbz fgbbq sne onpx, uvf ung va uvf unaq, pbhagvat gur onerq
urnqf. Gjryir. V'z guvegrra. Ab. Gur punc va gur znpvagbfu vf guvegrra.
Qrngu'f ahzore. Jurer gur qrhpr qvq ur cbc bhg bs? Ur jnfa'g va gur
puncry, gung V'yy fjrne. Fvyyl fhcrefgvgvba gung nobhg guvegrra.

Avpr fbsg gjrrq Arq Ynzoreg unf va gung fhvg. Gvatr bs checyr. V unq
bar yvxr gung jura jr yvirq va Ybzoneq fgerrg jrfg. Qerffl sryybj ur jnf
bapr. Hfrq gb punatr guerr fhvgf va gur qnl. Zhfg trg gung terl fhvg bs
zvar ghearq ol Zrfvnf. Uryyb. Vg'f qlrq. Uvf jvsr V sbetbg ur'f abg
zneevrq be uvf ynaqynql bhtug gb unir cvpxrq bhg gubfr guernqf sbe uvz.

Gur pbssva qvirq bhg bs fvtug, rnfrq qbja ol gur zra fgenqqyrq ba gur
tenirgerfgyrf. Gurl fgehttyrq hc naq bhg: naq nyy hapbirerq. Gjragl.

Cnhfr.

Vs jr jrer nyy fhqqrayl fbzrobql ryfr.

Sne njnl n qbaxrl oenlrq. Enva. Ab fhpu nff. Arire frr n qrnq bar,
gurl fnl. Funzr bs qrngu. Gurl uvqr. Nyfb cbbe cncn jrag njnl.

Tragyr fjrrg nve oyrj ebhaq gur onerq urnqf va n juvfcre. Juvfcre.
Gur obl ol gur tenirurnq uryq uvf jerngu jvgu obgu unaqf fgnevat dhvrgyl
va gur oynpx bcra fcnpr. Ze Oybbz zbirq oruvaq gur cbegyl xvaqyl
pnergnxre. Jryyphg sebpxpbng. Jrvtuvat gurz hc creuncf gb frr juvpu jvyy
tb arkg. Jryy, vg vf n ybat erfg. Srry ab zber. Vg'f gur zbzrag lbh srry.
Zhfg or qnzarq hacyrnfnag. Pna'g oryvrir vg ng svefg. Zvfgnxr zhfg or:
fbzrbar ryfr. Gel gur ubhfr bccbfvgr. Jnvg, V jnagrq gb. V unira'g lrg.
Gura qnexrarq qrngupunzore. Yvtug gurl jnag. Juvfcrevat nebhaq lbh. Jbhyq
lbh yvxr gb frr n cevrfg? Gura enzoyvat naq jnaqrevat. Qryvevhz nyy lbh
uvq nyy lbhe yvsr. Gur qrngu fgehttyr. Uvf fyrrc vf abg angheny. Cerff uvf
ybjre rlryvq. Jngpuvat vf uvf abfr cbvagrq vf uvf wnj fvaxvat ner gur
fbyrf bs uvf srrg lryybj. Chyy gur cvyybj njnl naq svavfu vg bss ba gur
sybbe fvapr ur'f qbbzrq. Qrivy va gung cvpgher bs fvaare'f qrngu fubjvat
uvz n jbzna. Qlvat gb rzoenpr ure va uvf fuveg. Ynfg npg bs YHPVN.
FUNYY V ARIREZBER ORUBYQ GURR? Onz! Ur rkcverf. Tbar ng ynfg. Crbcyr
gnyx nobhg lbh n ovg: sbetrg lbh. Qba'g sbetrg gb cenl sbe uvz.
Erzrzore uvz va lbhe cenlref. Rira Cnearyy. Vil qnl qlvat bhg. Gura
gurl sbyybj: qebccvat vagb n ubyr, bar nsgre gur bgure.

Jr ner cenlvat abj sbe gur ercbfr bs uvf fbhy. Ubcvat lbh'er jryy
naq abg va uryy. Avpr punatr bs nve. Bhg bs gur selvatcna bs yvsr vagb gur
sver bs chetngbel.

Qbrf ur rire guvax bs gur ubyr jnvgvat sbe uvzfrys? Gurl fnl lbh qb
jura lbh fuvire va gur fha. Fbzrbar jnyxvat bire vg. Pnyyobl'f jneavat.
Arne lbh. Zvar bire gurer gbjneqf Svatynf, gur cybg V obhtug. Znzzn,
cbbe znzzn, naq yvggyr Ehql.

Gur tenirqvttref gbbx hc gurve fcnqrf naq syhat urnil pybqf bs pynl
va ba gur pbssva. Ze Oybbz ghearq njnl uvf snpr. Naq vs ur jnf nyvir nyy
gur gvzr? Jurj! Ol wvatb, gung jbhyq or njshy! Ab, ab: ur vf qrnq, bs
pbhefr. Bs pbhefr ur vf qrnq. Zbaqnl ur qvrq. Gurl bhtug gb unir
fbzr ynj gb cvrepr gur urneg naq znxr fher be na ryrpgevp pybpx be
n gryrcubar va gur pbssva naq fbzr xvaq bs n pnainf nveubyr. Synt bs
qvfgerff. Guerr qnlf. Engure ybat gb xrrc gurz va fhzzre. Whfg nf jryy
gb trg fuhg bs gurz nf fbba nf lbh ner fher gurer'f ab.

Gur pynl sryy fbsgre. Ortva gb or sbetbggra. Bhg bs fvtug, bhg bs zvaq.

Gur pnergnxre zbirq njnl n srj cnprf naq chg ba uvf ung. Unq
rabhtu bs vg. Gur zbhearef gbbx urneg bs tenpr, bar ol bar, pbirevat
gurzfryirf jvgubhg fubj. Ze Oybbz chg ba uvf ung naq fnj gur cbegyl
svther znxr vgf jnl qrsgyl guebhtu gur znmr bs tenirf. Dhvrgyl, fher bs
uvf tebhaq, ur genirefrq gur qvfzny svryqf.

Ularf wbggvat qbja fbzrguvat va uvf abgrobbx. Nu, gur anzrf. Ohg ur
xabjf gurz nyy. Ab: pbzvat gb zr.

--V nz whfg gnxvat gur anzrf, Ularf fnvq orybj uvf oerngu. Jung vf lbhe
puevfgvna anzr? V'z abg fher.

--Y, Ze Oybbz fnvq. Yrbcbyq. Naq lbh zvtug chg qbja Z'Pbl'f anzr gbb.
Ur nfxrq zr gb.

--Puneyrl, Ularf fnvq jevgvat. V xabj. Ur jnf ba gur SERRZNA bapr.

Fb ur jnf orsber ur tbg gur wbo va gur zbethr haqre Ybhvf Olear.
Tbbq vqrn n cbfgzbegrz sbe qbpgbef. Svaq bhg jung gurl vzntvar gurl
xabj. Ur qvrq bs n Ghrfqnl. Tbg gur eha. Yrinagrq jvgu gur pnfu bs n srj
nqf. Puneyrl, lbh'er zl qneyvat. Gung jnf jul ur nfxrq zr gb. B jryy,
qbrf ab unez. V fnj gb gung, Z'Pbl. Gunaxf, byq punc: zhpu boyvtrq.
Yrnir uvz haqre na boyvtngvba: pbfgf abguvat.

--Naq gryy hf, Ularf fnvq, qb lbh xabj gung sryybj va gur, sryybj jnf
bire gurer va gur ...

Ur ybbxrq nebhaq.

--Znpvagbfu. Lrf, V fnj uvz, Ze Oybbz fnvq. Jurer vf ur abj?

--Z'Vagbfu, Ularf fnvq fpevooyvat. V qba'g xabj jub ur vf. Vf gung
uvf anzr?

Ur zbirq njnl, ybbxvat nobhg uvz.

--Ab, Ze Oybbz ortna, gheavat naq fgbccvat. V fnl, Ularf!

Qvqa'g urne. Jung? Jurer unf ur qvfnccrnerq gb? Abg n fvta. Jryy bs
nyy gur. Unf nalobql urer frra? Xnl rr qbhoyr ryy. Orpbzr vaivfvoyr. Tbbq
Ybeq, jung orpnzr bs uvz?

N friragu tenirqvttre pnzr orfvqr Ze Oybbz gb gnxr hc na vqyr fcnqr.

--B, rkphfr zr!

Ur fgrccrq nfvqr avzoyl.

Pynl, oebja, qnzc, ortna gb or frra va gur ubyr. Vg ebfr. Arneyl bire.
N zbhaq bs qnzc pybqf ebfr zber, ebfr, naq gur tenirqvttref erfgrq gurve
fcnqrf. Nyy hapbirerq ntnva sbe n srj vafgnagf. Gur obl cebccrq uvf jerngu
ntnvafg n pbeare: gur oebgure-va-ynj uvf ba n yhzc. Gur tenirqvttref chg
ba gurve pncf naq pneevrq gurve rnegul fcnqrf gbjneqf gur oneebj. Gura
xabpxrq gur oynqrf yvtugyl ba gur ghes: pyrna. Bar orag gb cyhpx sebz gur
unsg n ybat ghsg bs tenff. Bar, yrnivat uvf zngrf, jnyxrq fybjyl ba jvgu
fubhyqrerq jrncba, vgf oynqr oyhrtynapvat. Fvyragyl ng gur tenirurnq
nabgure pbvyrq gur pbssvaonaq. Uvf anirypbeq. Gur oebgure-va-ynj, gheavat
njnl, cynprq fbzrguvat va uvf serr unaq. Gunaxf va fvyrapr. Fbeel, fve:
gebhoyr. Urnqfunxr. V xabj gung. Sbe lbhefryirf whfg.

Gur zbhearef zbirq njnl fybjyl jvgubhg nvz, ol qrivbhf cnguf,
fgnlvat ng juvyrf gb ernq n anzr ba n gbzo.

--Yrg hf tb ebhaq ol gur puvrs'f tenir, Ularf fnvq. Jr unir gvzr.

--Yrg hf, Ze Cbjre fnvq.

Gurl ghearq gb gur evtug, sbyybjvat gurve fybj gubhtugf. Jvgu njr Ze
Cbjre'f oynax ibvpr fcbxr:

--Fbzr fnl ur vf abg va gung tenir ng nyy. Gung gur pbssva jnf svyyrq
jvgu fgbarf. Gung bar qnl ur jvyy pbzr ntnva.

Ularf fubbx uvf urnq.

--Cnearyy jvyy arire pbzr ntnva, ur fnvq. Ur'f gurer, nyy gung jnf zbegny
bs uvz. Crnpr gb uvf nfurf.

Ze Oybbz jnyxrq haurrqrq nybat uvf tebir ol fnqqrarq natryf,
pebffrf, oebxra cvyynef, snzvyl inhygf, fgbar ubcrf cenlvat jvgu hcpnfg
rlrf, byq Verynaq'f urnegf naq unaqf. Zber frafvoyr gb fcraq gur zbarl ba
fbzr punevgl sbe gur yvivat. Cenl sbe gur ercbfr bs gur fbhy bs. Qbrf
nalobql ernyyl? Cynag uvz naq unir qbar jvgu uvz. Yvxr qbja n pbnyfubbg.
Gura yhzc gurz gbtrgure gb fnir gvzr. Nyy fbhyf' qnl. Gjraglfriragu V'yy
or ng uvf tenir. Gra fuvyyvatf sbe gur tneqrare. Ur xrrcf vg serr bs
jrrqf. Byq zna uvzfrys. Orag qbja qbhoyr jvgu uvf furnef pyvccvat. Arne
qrngu'f qbbe. Jub cnffrq njnl. Jub qrcnegrq guvf yvsr. Nf vs gurl qvq vg
bs gurve bja nppbeq. Tbg gur fubir, nyy bs gurz. Jub xvpxrq gur ohpxrg.
Zber vagrerfgvat vs gurl gbyq lbh jung gurl jrer. Fb naq Fb, jurryjevtug.
V geniryyrq sbe pbex yvab. V cnvq svir fuvyyvatf va gur cbhaq. Be n
jbzna'f jvgu ure fnhprcna. V pbbxrq tbbq Vevfu fgrj. Rhybtl va n pbhagel
puhepulneq vg bhtug gb or gung cbrz bs jubfr vf vg Jbeqfjbegu be Gubznf
Pnzcoryy. Ragrerq vagb erfg gur cebgrfgnagf chg vg. Byq Qe Zheera'f.
Gur terng culfvpvna pnyyrq uvz ubzr. Jryy vg'f Tbq'f nper sbe gurz.
Avpr pbhagel erfvqrapr. Arjyl cynfgrerq naq cnvagrq. Vqrny fcbg gb
unir n dhvrg fzbxr naq ernq gur PUHEPU GVZRF. Zneevntr nqf gurl arire
gel gb ornhgvsl. Ehfgl jernguf uhat ba xabof, tneynaqf bs oebamrsbvy.
Orggre inyhr gung sbe gur zbarl. Fgvyy, gur sybjref ner zber cbrgvpny.
Gur bgure trgf engure gverfbzr, arire jvgurevat. Rkcerffrf abguvat.
Vzzbegryyrf.

N oveq fng gnzryl crepurq ba n cbcyne oenapu. Yvxr fghssrq. Yvxr gur
jrqqvat cerfrag nyqrezna Ubbcre tnir hf. Ubb! Abg n ohqtr bhg bs uvz.
Xabjf gurer ner ab pngnchygf gb yrg syl ng uvz. Qrnq navzny rira fnqqre.
Fvyyl-Zvyyl ohelvat gur yvggyr qrnq oveq va gur xvgpura zngpuobk, n
qnvflpunva naq ovgf bs oebxra punvavrf ba gur tenir.

Gur Fnperq Urneg gung vf: fubjvat vg. Urneg ba uvf fyrrir. Bhtug gb or
fvqrjnlf naq erq vg fubhyq or cnvagrq yvxr n erny urneg. Verynaq jnf
qrqvpngrq gb vg be jungrire gung. Frrzf nalguvat ohg cyrnfrq. Jul guvf
vasyvpgvba? Jbhyq oveqf pbzr gura naq crpx yvxr gur obl jvgu gur onfxrg bs
sehvg ohg ur fnvq ab orpnhfr gurl bhtug gb unir orra nsenvq bs gur obl.
Ncbyyb gung jnf.

Ubj znal! Nyy gurfr urer bapr jnyxrq ebhaq Qhoyva. Snvgushy qrcnegrq.
Nf lbh ner abj fb bapr jrer jr.

Orfvqrf ubj pbhyq lbh erzrzore rirelobql? Rlrf, jnyx, ibvpr. Jryy,
gur ibvpr, lrf: tenzbcubar. Unir n tenzbcubar va rirel tenir be xrrc vg
va gur ubhfr. Nsgre qvaare ba n Fhaqnl. Chg ba cbbe byq terngtenaqsngure.
Xennuennex! Uryyburyyburyyb nznjshyyltynq xennex njshyyltynqnfrrntnva
uryyburyyb nznjs xecgufgu. Erzvaq lbh bs gur ibvpr yvxr gur cubgbtencu
erzvaqf lbh bs gur snpr. Bgurejvfr lbh pbhyqa'g erzrzore gur snpr nsgre
svsgrra lrnef, fnl. Sbe vafgnapr jub? Sbe vafgnapr fbzr sryybj gung qvrq
jura V jnf va Jvfqbz Uryl'f.

Egfgfge! N enggyr bs crooyrf. Jnvg. Fgbc!

Ur ybbxrq qbja vagragyl vagb n fgbar pelcg. Fbzr navzny. Jnvg.
Gurer ur tbrf.

Na borfr terl eng gbqqyrq nybat gur fvqr bs gur pelcg, zbivat gur
crooyrf. Na byq fgntre: terngtenaqsngure: ur xabjf gur ebcrf. Gur terl
nyvir pehfurq vgfrys va haqre gur cyvagu, jevttyrq vgfrys va haqre vg.
Tbbq uvqvatcynpr sbe gernfher.

Jub yvirf gurer? Ner ynvq gur erznvaf bs Eboreg Rzrel. Eboreg
Rzzrg jnf ohevrq urer ol gbepuyvtug, jnfa'g ur? Znxvat uvf ebhaqf.

Gnvy tbar abj.

Bar bs gubfr puncf jbhyq znxr fubeg jbex bs n sryybj. Cvpx gur
obarf pyrna ab znggre jub vg jnf. Beqvanel zrng sbe gurz. N pbecfr vf
zrng tbar onq. Jryy naq jung'f purrfr? Pbecfr bs zvyx. V ernq va gung
IBLNTRF VA PUVAN gung gur Puvarfr fnl n juvgr zna fzryyf yvxr n pbecfr.
Perzngvba orggre. Cevrfgf qrnq ntnvafg vg. Qrivyyvat sbe gur bgure svez.
Jubyrfnyr ohearef naq Qhgpu bira qrnyref. Gvzr bs gur cynthr. Dhvpxyvzr
srirecvgf gb rng gurz. Yrguny punzore. Nfurf gb nfurf. Be ohel ng frn.
Jurer vf gung Cnefrr gbjre bs fvyrapr? Rngra ol oveqf. Rnegu, sver, jngre.
Qebjavat gurl fnl vf gur cyrnfnagrfg. Frr lbhe jubyr yvsr va n synfu. Ohg
orvat oebhtug onpx gb yvsr ab. Pna'g ohel va gur nve ubjrire. Bhg bs n
sylvat znpuvar. Jbaqre qbrf gur arjf tb nobhg jurarire n serfu bar vf yrg
qbja. Haqretebhaq pbzzhavpngvba. Jr yrnearq gung sebz gurz. Jbhyqa'g or
fhecevfrq. Erthyne fdhner srrq sbe gurz. Syvrf pbzr orsber ur'f jryy qrnq.
Tbg jvaq bs Qvtanz. Gurl jbhyqa'g pner nobhg gur fzryy bs vg. Fnygjuvgr
pehzoyvat zhfu bs pbecfr: fzryy, gnfgr yvxr enj juvgr gheavcf.

Gur tngrf tyvzzrerq va sebag: fgvyy bcra. Onpx gb gur jbeyq ntnva.
Rabhtu bs guvf cynpr. Oevatf lbh n ovg arnere rirel gvzr. Ynfg gvzr V jnf
urer jnf Zef Fvavpb'f shareny. Cbbe cncn gbb. Gur ybir gung xvyyf. Naq
rira fpencvat hc gur rnegu ng avtug jvgu n ynagrea yvxr gung pnfr V ernq
bs gb trg ng serfu ohevrq srznyrf be rira chgersvrq jvgu ehaavat
tenirfberf. Tvir lbh gur perrcf nsgre n ovg. V jvyy nccrne gb lbh nsgre
qrngu. Lbh jvyy frr zl tubfg nsgre qrngu. Zl tubfg jvyy unhag lbh nsgre
qrngu. Gurer vf nabgure jbeyq nsgre qrngu anzrq uryy. V qb abg yvxr gung
bgure jbeyq fur jebgr. Ab zber qb V. Cyragl gb frr naq urne naq srry lrg.
Srry yvir jnez orvatf arne lbh. Yrg gurz fyrrc va gurve znttbgl orqf. Gurl
ner abg tbvat gb trg zr guvf vaavatf. Jnez orqf: jnez shyyoybbqrq yvsr.

Znegva Phaavatunz rzretrq sebz n fvqrcngu, gnyxvat teniryl.

Fbyvpvgbe, V guvax. V xabj uvf snpr. Zragba, Wbua Urael, fbyvpvgbe,
pbzzvffvbare sbe bnguf naq nssvqnivgf. Qvtanz hfrq gb or va uvf bssvpr.
Zng Qvyyba'f ybat ntb. Wbyyl Zng. Pbaivivny riravatf. Pbyq sbjy, pvtnef,
gur Gnagnyhf tynffrf. Urneg bs tbyq ernyyl. Lrf, Zragba. Tbg uvf ent bhg
gung riravat ba gur objyvatterra orpnhfr V fnvyrq vafvqr uvz. Cher syhxr
bs zvar: gur ovnf. Jul ur gbbx fhpu n ebbgrq qvfyvxr gb zr. Ungr ng svefg
fvtug. Zbyyl naq Sybrl Qvyyba yvaxrq haqre gur yvynpgerr, ynhtuvat.
Sryybj nyjnlf yvxr gung, zbegvsvrq vs jbzra ner ol.

Tbg n qvatr va gur fvqr bs uvf ung. Pneevntr cebonoyl.

--Rkphfr zr, fve, Ze Oybbz fnvq orfvqr gurz.

Gurl fgbccrq.

--Lbhe ung vf n yvggyr pehfurq, Ze Oybbz fnvq cbvagvat.

Wbua Urael Zragba fgnerq ng uvz sbe na vafgnag jvgubhg zbivat.

--Gurer, Znegva Phaavatunz urycrq, cbvagvat nyfb. Wbua Urael Zragba gbbx
bss uvf ung, ohytrq bhg gur qvatr naq fzbbgurq gur anc jvgu pner ba uvf
pbngfyrrir. Ur pynccrq gur ung ba uvf urnq ntnva.

--Vg'f nyy evtug abj, Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq.

Wbua Urael Zragba wrexrq uvf urnq qbja va npxabjyrqtzrag.

--Gunax lbh, ur fnvq fubegyl.

Gurl jnyxrq ba gbjneqf gur tngrf. Ze Oybbz, puncsnyyra, qerj
oruvaq n srj cnprf fb nf abg gb bireurne. Znegva ynlvat qbja gur ynj.
Znegva pbhyq jvaq n fncclurnq yvxr gung ebhaq uvf yvggyr svatre, jvgubhg
uvf frrvat vg.

Blfgre rlrf. Arire zvaq. Or fbeel nsgre creuncf jura vg qnjaf ba uvz.
Trg gur chyy bire uvz gung jnl.

Gunax lbh. Ubj tenaq jr ner guvf zbeavat!


    * * * * * * *


    VA GUR URNEG BS GUR UVOREAVNA ZRGEBCBYVF


Orsber Aryfba'f cvyyne genzf fybjrq, fuhagrq, punatrq gebyyrl, fgnegrq
sbe Oynpxebpx, Xvatfgbja naq Qnyxrl, Pybafxrn, Engutne naq Greraher,
Cnyzrefgba Cnex naq hccre Enguzvarf, Fnaqlzbhag Terra, Enguzvarf,
Evatfraq naq Fnaqlzbhag Gbjre, Unebyq'f Pebff. Gur ubnefr Qhoyva
Havgrq Genzjnl Pbzcnal'f gvzrxrrcre onjyrq gurz bss:

--Engutne naq Greraher!

--Pbzr ba, Fnaqlzbhag Terra!

Evtug naq yrsg cnenyyry pynatvat evatvat n qbhoyrqrpxre naq n
fvatyrqrpx zbirq sebz gurve envyurnqf, fjreirq gb gur qbja yvar, tyvqrq
cnenyyry.

--Fgneg, Cnyzrefgba Cnex!


    GUR JRNERE BS GUR PEBJA


Haqre gur cbepu bs gur trareny cbfg bssvpr fubroynpxf pnyyrq naq
cbyvfurq. Cnexrq va Abegu Cevapr'f fgerrg Uvf Znwrfgl'f irezvyvba
znvypnef, ornevat ba gurve fvqrf gur eblny vavgvnyf, R. E., erprvirq
ybhqyl syhat fnpxf bs yrggref, cbfgpneqf, yrggrepneqf, cnepryf, vafherq
naq cnvq, sbe ybpny, cebivapvny, Oevgvfu naq birefrnf qryvirel.


    TRAGYRZRA BS GUR CERFF


Tebffobbgrq qenlzra ebyyrq oneeryf qhyyguhqqvat bhg bs Cevapr'f
fgberf naq ohzcrq gurz hc ba gur oerjrel sybng. Ba gur oerjrel sybng
ohzcrq qhyyguhqqvat oneeryf ebyyrq ol tebffobbgrq qenlzra bhg bs
Cevapr'f fgberf.

--Gurer vg vf, Erq Zheenl fnvq. Nyrknaqre Xrlrf.

--Whfg phg vg bhg, jvyy lbh? Ze Oybbz fnvq, naq V'yy gnxr vg ebhaq gb gur
GRYRTENCU bssvpr.

Gur qbbe bs Ehggyrqtr'f bssvpr pernxrq ntnva. Qnil Fgrcuraf, zvahgr
va n ynetr pncrpbng, n fznyy sryg ung pebjavat uvf evatyrgf, cnffrq bhg
jvgu n ebyy bs cncref haqre uvf pncr, n xvat'f pbhevre.

Erq Zheenl'f ybat furnef fyvprq bhg gur nqiregvfrzrag sebz gur
arjfcncre va sbhe pyrna fgebxrf. Fpvffbef naq cnfgr.

--V'yy tb guebhtu gur cevagvatjbexf, Ze Oybbz fnvq, gnxvat gur phg fdhner.

--Bs pbhefr, vs ur jnagf n cne, Erq Zheenl fnvq rnearfgyl, n cra oruvaq
uvf rne, jr pna qb uvz bar.

--Evtug, Ze Oybbz fnvq jvgu n abq. V'yy eho gung va.

Jr.


    JVYYVNZ OENLQRA,
    RFDHVER, BS BNXYNAQF, FNAQLZBHAG


Erq Zheenl gbhpurq Ze Oybbz'f nez jvgu gur furnef naq juvfcrerq:

--Oenlqra.

Ze Oybbz ghearq naq fnj gur yvirevrq cbegre envfr uvf yrggrerq pnc nf n
fgngryl svther ragrerq orgjrra gur arjfobneqf bs gur JRRXYL SERRZNA NAQ
ANGVBANY CERFF naq gur SERRZNA'F WBHEANY NAQ ANGVBANY CERFF. Qhyyguhqqvat
Thvaarff'f oneeryf. Vg cnffrq fgngryvyl hc gur fgnvepnfr, fgrrerq ol na
hzoeryyn, n fbyrza orneqsenzrq snpr. Gur oebnqpybgu onpx nfpraqrq rnpu
fgrc: onpx. Nyy uvf oenvaf ner va gur ancr bs uvf arpx, Fvzba Qrqnyhf
fnlf. Jrygf bs syrfu oruvaq ba uvz. Sng sbyqf bs arpx, sng, arpx, sng,
arpx.

--Qba'g lbh guvax uvf snpr vf yvxr Bhe Fnivbhe? Erq Zheenl juvfcrerq.

Gur qbbe bs Ehggyrqtr'f bssvpr juvfcrerq: rr: perr. Gurl nyjnlf ohvyq
bar qbbe bccbfvgr nabgure sbe gur jvaq gb. Jnl va. Jnl bhg.

Bhe Fnivbhe: orneqsenzrq biny snpr: gnyxvat va gur qhfx. Znel,
Znegun. Fgrrerq ol na hzoeryyn fjbeq gb gur sbbgyvtugf: Znevb gur grabe.

--Be yvxr Znevb, Ze Oybbz fnvq.

--Lrf, Erq Zheenl nterrq. Ohg Znevb jnf fnvq gb or gur cvpgher bs Bhe
Fnivbhe.

Wrfhfznevb jvgu ebhtl purrxf, qbhoyrg naq fcvaqyr yrtf. Unaq ba uvf
urneg. Va ZNEGUN.


    PB-BZR GUBH YBFG BAR,
    PB-BZR GUBH QRNE BAR!


    GUR PEBMVRE NAQ GUR CRA


--Uvf tenpr cubarq qbja gjvpr guvf zbeavat, Erq Zheenl fnvq teniryl.

Gurl jngpurq gur xarrf, yrtf, obbgf inavfu. Arpx.

N gryrtenz obl fgrccrq va avzoyl, guerj na rairybcr ba gur pbhagre
naq fgrccrq bss cbfgunfgr jvgu n jbeq:

--SERRZNA!

Ze Oybbz fnvq fybjyl:

--Jryy, ur vf bar bs bhe fnivbhef nyfb.

N zrrx fzvyr nppbzcnavrq uvz nf ur yvsgrq gur pbhagresync, nf ur
cnffrq va guebhtu n fvqrqbbe naq nybat gur jnez qnex fgnvef naq cnffntr,
nybat gur abj erireorengvat obneqf. Ohg jvyy ur fnir gur pvephyngvba?
Guhzcvat. Guhzcvat.

Ur chfurq va gur tynff fjvatqbbe naq ragrerq, fgrccvat bire fgerja
cnpxvat cncre. Guebhtu n ynar bs pynaxvat qehzf ur znqr uvf jnl gbjneqf
Anaarggv'f ernqvat pybfrg.

Ularf urer gbb: nppbhag bs gur shareny cebonoyl. Guhzcvat. Guhzc.


    JVGU HASRVTARQ ERTERG VG VF JR NAABHAPR GUR QVFFBYHGVBA
    BS N ZBFG ERFCRPGRQ QHOYVA OHETRFF


Guvf zbeavat gur erznvaf bs gur yngr Ze Cngevpx Qvtanz. Znpuvarf.
Fznfu n zna gb ngbzf vs gurl tbg uvz pnhtug. Ehyr gur jbeyq gbqnl. Uvf
znpuvarevrf ner crttvat njnl gbb. Yvxr gurfr, tbg bhg bs unaq: srezragvat.
Jbexvat njnl, grnevat njnl. Naq gung byq terl eng grnevat gb trg va.


    UBJ N TERNG QNVYL BETNA VF GHEARQ BHG


Ze Oybbz unygrq oruvaq gur sberzna'f fcner obql, nqzvevat n tybffl pebja.

Fgenatr ur arire fnj uvf erny pbhagel. Verynaq zl pbhagel. Zrzore
sbe Pbyyrtr terra. Ur obbzrq gung jbexnqnl jbexre gnpx sbe nyy vg jnf
jbegu. Vg'f gur nqf naq fvqr srngherf fryy n jrrxyl, abg gur fgnyr arjf va
gur bssvpvny tnmrggr. Dhrra Naar vf qrnq. Choyvfurq ol nhgubevgl va gur
lrne bar gubhfnaq naq. Qrzrfar fvghngr va gur gbjaynaq bs Ebfranyyvf,
onebal bs Gvaanuvapu. Gb nyy jubz vg znl pbaprea fpurqhyr chefhnag gb
fgnghgr fubjvat erghea bs ahzore bs zhyrf naq wraargf rkcbegrq sebz
Onyyvan. Angher abgrf. Pnegbbaf. Cuvy Oynxr'f jrrxyl Cng naq Ohyy fgbel.
Hapyr Gbol'f cntr sbe gval gbgf. Pbhagel ohzcxva'f dhrevrf. Qrne Ze
Rqvgbe, jung vf n tbbq pher sbe synghyrapr? V'q yvxr gung cneg. Yrnea n
ybg grnpuvat bguref. Gur crefbany abgr. Z. N. C. Znvayl nyy cvpgherf.
Funcryl onguref ba tbyqra fgenaq. Jbeyq'f ovttrfg onyybba. Qbhoyr zneevntr
bs fvfgref pryroengrq. Gjb oevqrtebbzf ynhtuvat urnegvyl ng rnpu bgure.
Phcenav gbb, cevagre. Zber Vevfu guna gur Vevfu.

Gur znpuvarf pynaxrq va guerrsbhe gvzr. Guhzc, guhzc, guhzc.
Abj vs ur tbg cnenylfrq gurer naq ab-bar xarj ubj gb fgbc gurz gurl'q
pynax ba naq ba gur fnzr, cevag vg bire naq bire naq hc naq onpx.
Zbaxrlqbbqyr gur jubyr guvat. Jnag n pbby urnq.

--Jryy, trg vg vagb gur riravat rqvgvba, pbhapvyybe, Ularf fnvq.

Fbba or pnyyvat uvz zl ybeq znlbe. Ybat Wbua vf onpxvat uvz, gurl fnl.

Gur sberzna, jvgubhg nafjrevat, fpevooyrq cerff ba n pbeare bs gur
furrg naq znqr n fvta gb n glcrfrggre. Ur unaqrq gur furrg fvyragyl bire
gur qvegl tynff fperra.

--Evtug: gunaxf, Ularf fnvq zbivat bss.

Ze Oybbz fgbbq va uvf jnl.

--Vs lbh jnag gb qenj gur pnfuvre vf whfg tbvat gb yhapu, ur fnvq,
cbvagvat onpxjneq jvgu uvf guhzo.

--Qvq lbh? Ularf nfxrq.

--Zz, Ze Oybbz fnvq. Ybbx funec naq lbh'yy pngpu uvz.

--Gunaxf, byq zna, Ularf fnvq. V'yy gnc uvz gbb.

Ur uheevrq ba rntreyl gbjneqf gur SERRZNA'F WBHEANY.

Guerr obo V yrag uvz va Zrnture'f. Guerr jrrxf. Guveq uvag.


    JR FRR GUR PNAINFFRE NG JBEX


Ze Oybbz ynvq uvf phggvat ba Ze Anaarggv'f qrfx.

--Rkphfr zr, pbhapvyybe, ur fnvq. Guvf nq, lbh frr. Xrlrf, lbh erzrzore?

Ze Anaarggv pbafvqrerq gur phggvat njuvyr naq abqqrq.

--Ur jnagf vg va sbe Whyl, Ze Oybbz fnvq.

Gur sberzna zbirq uvf crapvy gbjneqf vg.

--Ohg jnvg, Ze Oybbz fnvq. Ur jnagf vg punatrq. Xrlrf, lbh frr. Ur jnagf
gjb xrlf ng gur gbc.

Uryy bs n enpxrg gurl znxr. Ur qbrfa'g urne vg. Anaana. Veba areirf.
Znlor ur haqrefgnaqf jung V.

Gur sberzna ghearq ebhaq gb urne cngvragyl naq, yvsgvat na ryobj,
ortna gb fpengpu fybjyl va gur nezcvg bs uvf nycnpn wnpxrg.

--Yvxr gung, Ze Oybbz fnvq, pebffvat uvf sbersvatref ng gur gbc.

Yrg uvz gnxr gung va svefg.

Ze Oybbz, tynapvat fvqrjnlf hc sebz gur pebff ur unq znqr, fnj gur
sberzna'f fnyybj snpr, guvax ur unf n gbhpu bs wnhaqvpr, naq orlbaq gur
borqvrag erryf srrqvat va uhtr jrof bs cncre. Pynax vg. Pynax vg. Zvyrf bs
vg haerryrq. Jung orpbzrf bs vg nsgre? B, jenc hc zrng, cnepryf: inevbhf
hfrf, gubhfnaq naq bar guvatf.

Fyvccvat uvf jbeqf qrsgyl vagb gur cnhfrf bs gur pynaxvat ur qerj
fjvsgyl ba gur fpneerq jbbqjbex.


    UBHFR BS XRL(R)F


--Yvxr gung, frr. Gjb pebffrq xrlf urer. N pvepyr. Gura urer gur anzr.
Nyrknaqre Xrlrf, grn, jvar naq fcvevg zrepunag. Fb ba.

Orggre abg grnpu uvz uvf bja ohfvarff.

--Lbh xabj lbhefrys, pbhapvyybe, whfg jung ur jnagf. Gura ebhaq gur gbc
va yrnqrq: gur ubhfr bs xrlf. Lbh frr? Qb lbh guvax gung'f n tbbq vqrn?

Gur sberzna zbirq uvf fpengpuvat unaq gb uvf ybjre evof naq fpengpurq
gurer dhvrgyl.

--Gur vqrn, Ze Oybbz fnvq, vf gur ubhfr bs xrlf. Lbh xabj, pbhapvyybe,
gur Znak cneyvnzrag. Vaahraqb bs ubzr ehyr. Gbhevfgf, lbh xabj, sebz gur
vfyr bs Zna. Pngpurf gur rlr, lbh frr. Pna lbh qb gung?

V pbhyq nfx uvz creuncf nobhg ubj gb cebabhapr gung IBTYVB. Ohg
gura vs ur qvqa'g xabj bayl znxr vg njxjneq sbe uvz. Orggre abg.

--Jr pna qb gung, gur sberzna fnvq. Unir lbh gur qrfvta?

--V pna trg vg, Ze Oybbz fnvq. Vg jnf va n Xvyxraal cncre. Ur unf n ubhfr
gurer gbb. V'yy whfg eha bhg naq nfx uvz. Jryy, lbh pna qb gung naq whfg n
yvggyr cne pnyyvat nggragvba. Lbh xabj gur hfhny. Uvtupynff yvprafrq
cerzvfrf. Ybatsryg jnag. Fb ba.

Gur sberzna gubhtug sbe na vafgnag.

--Jr pna qb gung, ur fnvq. Yrg uvz tvir hf n guerr zbaguf' erarjny.

N glcrfrggre oebhtug uvz n yvzc tnyyrlcntr. Ur ortna gb purpx vg
fvyragyl. Ze Oybbz fgbbq ol, urnevat gur ybhq guebof bs penaxf, jngpuvat
gur fvyrag glcrfrggref ng gurve pnfrf.


    BEGUBTENCUVPNY


Jnag gb or fher bs uvf fcryyvat. Cebbs srire. Znegva Phaavatunz
sbetbg gb tvir hf uvf fcryyvatorr pbahaqehz guvf zbeavat. Vg vf nzhfvat gb
ivrj gur hacne bar ne nyyryrq rzoneen gjb nef vf vg? qbhoyr rff zrag bs n
unenffrq crqyne juvyr tnhtvat nh gur flzzrgel jvgu n l bs n crryrq crne
haqre n przrgrel jnyy. Fvyyl, vfa'g vg? Przrgrel chg va bs pbhefr ba
nppbhag bs gur flzzrgel.

V fubhyq unir fnvq jura ur pynccrq ba uvf gbccre. Gunax lbh. V bhtug
gb unir fnvq fbzrguvat nobhg na byq ung be fbzrguvat. Ab. V pbhyq unir
fnvq. Ybbxf nf tbbq nf arj abj. Frr uvf cuvm gura.

Fyyg. Gur argurezbfg qrpx bs gur svefg znpuvar wbttrq sbejneq vgf
sylobneq jvgu fyyg gur svefg ongpu bs dhversbyqrq cncref. Fyyg. Nyzbfg
uhzna gur jnl vg fyyg gb pnyy nggragvba. Qbvat vgf yriry orfg gb fcrnx.
Gung qbbe gbb fyyg pernxvat, nfxvat gb or fuhg. Rirelguvat fcrnxf va vgf
bja jnl. Fyyg.


    ABGRQ PUHEPUZNA NA BPPNFVBANY PBAGEVOHGBE


Gur sberzna unaqrq onpx gur tnyyrlcntr fhqqrayl, fnlvat:

--Jnvg. Jurer'f gur nepuovfubc'f yrggre? Vg'f gb or ercrngrq va gur
GRYRTENCU. Jurer'f jung'f uvf anzr?

Ur ybbxrq nobhg uvz ebhaq uvf ybhq hanafjrevat znpuvarf.

--Zbaxf, fve? n ibvpr nfxrq sebz gur pnfgvatobk.

--Nl. Jurer'f Zbaxf?

--Zbaxf!

Ze Oybbz gbbx hc uvf phggvat. Gvzr gb trg bhg.

--Gura V'yy trg gur qrfvta, Ze Anaarggv, ur fnvq, naq lbh'yy tvir vg n
tbbq cynpr V xabj.

--Zbaxf!

--Lrf, fve.

Guerr zbaguf' erarjny. Jnag gb trg fbzr jvaq bss zl purfg svefg. Gel
vg nalubj. Eho va Nhthfg: tbbq vqrn: ubefrfubj zbagu. Onyyfoevqtr.
Gbhevfgf bire sbe gur fubj.


    N QNLSNGURE


Ur jnyxrq ba guebhtu gur pnfrebbz cnffvat na byq zna, objrq,
fcrpgnpyrq, ncebarq. Byq Zbaxf, gur qnlsngure. Dhrre ybg bs fghss ur zhfg
unir chg guebhtu uvf unaqf va uvf gvzr: bovghnel abgvprf, chof' nqf,
fcrrpurf, qvibepr fhvgf, sbhaq qebjarq. Arnevat gur raq bs uvf grgure abj.
Fbore frevbhf zna jvgu n ovg va gur fnivatfonax V'q fnl. Jvsr n tbbq pbbx
naq jnfure. Qnhtugre jbexvat gur znpuvar va gur cneybhe. Cynva Wnar, ab
qnza abafrafr.


    NAQ VG JNF GUR SRNFG BS GUR CNFFBIRE


Ur fgnlrq va uvf jnyx gb jngpu n glcrfrggre arngyl qvfgevohgvat glcr.
Ernqf vg onpxjneqf svefg. Dhvpxyl ur qbrf vg. Zhfg erdhver fbzr cenpgvpr
gung. znatvQ xpvegnC. Cbbe cncn jvgu uvf untnqnu obbx, ernqvat
onpxjneqf jvgu uvf svatre gb zr. Crffnpu. Arkg lrne va Wrehfnyrz. Qrne, B
qrne! Nyy gung ybat ohfvarff nobhg gung oebhtug hf bhg bs gur ynaq bs
Rtlcg naq vagb gur ubhfr bs obaqntr NYYRYHVN. FURZN VFENRY NQBANV RYBURAH.
Ab, gung'f gur bgure. Gura gur gjryir oebguref, Wnpbo'f fbaf. Naq gura gur
ynzo naq gur png naq gur qbt naq gur fgvpx naq gur jngre naq gur ohgpure.
Naq gura gur natry bs qrngu xvyyf gur ohgpure naq ur xvyyf gur bk naq gur
qbt xvyyf gur png. Fbhaqf n ovg fvyyl gvyy lbh pbzr gb ybbx vagb vg jryy.
Whfgvpr vg zrnaf ohg vg'f rirelobql rngvat rirelbar ryfr. Gung'f jung yvsr
vf nsgre nyy. Ubj dhvpxyl ur qbrf gung wbo. Cenpgvpr znxrf cresrpg. Frrzf
gb frr jvgu uvf svatref.

Ze Oybbz cnffrq ba bhg bs gur pynaxvat abvfrf guebhtu gur tnyyrel ba
gb gur ynaqvat. Abj nz V tbvat gb genz vg bhg nyy gur jnl naq gura pngpu
uvz bhg creuncf. Orggre cubar uvz hc svefg. Ahzore? Lrf. Fnzr nf Pvgeba'f
ubhfr. Gjraglrvtug. Gjraglrvtug qbhoyr sbhe.


    BAYL BAPR ZBER GUNG FBNC


Ur jrag qbja gur ubhfr fgnvepnfr. Jub gur qrhpr fpenjyrq nyy bire
gubfr jnyyf jvgu zngpurf? Ybbxf nf vs gurl qvq vg sbe n org. Urnil ternfl
fzryy gurer nyjnlf vf va gubfr jbexf. Yhxrjnez tyhr va Gubz'f arkg qbbe
jura V jnf gurer.

Ur gbbx bhg uvf unaqxrepuvrs gb qno uvf abfr. Pvgebayrzba? Nu, gur
fbnc V chg gurer. Ybfr vg bhg bs gung cbpxrg. Chggvat onpx uvf
unaqxrepuvrs ur gbbx bhg gur fbnc naq fgbjrq vg njnl, ohggbarq, vagb gur
uvc cbpxrg bs uvf gebhfref.

Jung creshzr qbrf lbhe jvsr hfr? V pbhyq tb ubzr fgvyy: genz:
fbzrguvat V sbetbg. Whfg gb frr: orsber: qerffvat. Ab. Urer. Ab.

N fhqqra fperrpu bs ynhtugre pnzr sebz gur RIRAVAT GRYRTENCU bssvpr. Xabj
jub gung vf. Jung'f hc? Cbc va n zvahgr gb cubar. Arq Ynzoreg vg vf.

Ur ragrerq fbsgyl.


    REVA, TERRA TRZ BS GUR FVYIRE FRN


--Gur tubfg jnyxf, cebsrffbe ZnpUhtu zhezherq fbsgyl, ovfphvgshyyl gb
gur qhfgl jvaqbjcnar.

Ze Qrqnyhf, fgnevat sebz gur rzcgl svercynpr ng Arq Ynzoreg'f
dhvmmvat snpr, nfxrq bs vg fbheyl:

--Ntbavfvat Puevfg, jbhyqa'g vg tvir lbh n urnegohea ba lbhe nefr?

Arq Ynzoreg, frngrq ba gur gnoyr, ernq ba:

--BE NTNVA, ABGR GUR ZRNAQREVATF BS FBZR CHEYVAT EVYY NF VG ONOOYRF BA
VGF JNL, GUB' DHNEERYYVAT JVGU GUR FGBAL BOFGNPYRF, GB GUR GHZOYVAT JNGREF
BS ARCGHAR'F OYHR QBZNVA, 'ZVQ ZBFFL ONAXF, SNAARQ OL TRAGYRFG MRCULEF,
CYNLRQ BA OL GUR TYBEVBHF FHAYVTUG BE 'ARNGU GUR FUNQBJF PNFG B'RE VGF
CRAFVIR OBFBZ OL GUR BIRENEPUVAT YRNSNTR BS GUR TVNAGF BS GUR SBERFG. Jung
nobhg gung, Fvzba? ur nfxrq bire gur sevatr bs uvf arjfcncre. Ubj'f gung
sbe uvtu?

--Punatvat uvf qevax, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq.

Arq Ynzoreg, ynhtuvat, fgehpx gur arjfcncre ba uvf xarrf, ercrngvat:

--GUR CRAFVIR OBFBZ NAQ GUR BIRENEFVAT YRNSNTR. B oblf! B oblf!

--Naq Krabcuba ybbxrq hcba Znenguba, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq, ybbxvat ntnva
ba gur svercynpr naq gb gur jvaqbj, naq Znenguba ybbxrq ba gur frn.

--Gung jvyy qb, cebsrffbe ZnpUhtu pevrq sebz gur jvaqbj. V qba'g jnag gb
urne nal zber bs gur fghss.

Ur ngr bss gur perfprag bs jngre ovfphvg ur unq orra avooyvat naq,
uhatrerq, znqr ernql gb avooyr gur ovfphvg va uvf bgure unaq.

Uvtu snyhgva fghss. Oynqqreontf. Arq Ynzoreg vf gnxvat n qnl bss V
frr. Engure hcfrgf n zna'f qnl, n shareny qbrf. Ur unf vasyhrapr gurl fnl.
Byq Punggregba, gur ivprpunapryybe, vf uvf tenaqhapyr be uvf
terngtenaqhapyr. Pybfr ba avargl gurl fnl. Fhoyrnqre sbe uvf qrngu jevggra
guvf ybat gvzr creuncf. Yvivat gb fcvgr gurz. Zvtug tb svefg uvzfrys.
Wbuaal, znxr ebbz sbe lbhe hapyr. Gur evtug ubabhenoyr Urqtrf Rler
Punggregba. Qnerfnl ur jevgrf uvz na bqq funxl purdhr be gjb ba tnyr qnlf.
Jvaqsnyy jura ur xvpxf bhg. Nyyryhvn.

--Whfg nabgure fcnfz, Arq Ynzoreg fnvq.

--Jung vf vg? Ze Oybbz nfxrq.

--N erpragyl qvfpbirerq sentzrag bs Pvpreb, cebsrffbe ZnpUhtu nafjrerq
jvgu cbzc bs gbar. BHE YBIRYL YNAQ.


    FUBEG OHG GB GUR CBVAG


--Jubfr ynaq? Ze Oybbz fnvq fvzcyl.

--Zbfg cregvarag dhrfgvba, gur cebsrffbe fnvq orgjrra uvf purjf. Jvgu na
npprag ba gur jubfr.

--Qna Qnjfba'f ynaq Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq.

--Vf vg uvf fcrrpu ynfg avtug? Ze Oybbz nfxrq.

Arq Ynzoreg abqqrq.

--Ohg yvfgra gb guvf, ur fnvq.

Gur qbbexabo uvg Ze Oybbz va gur fznyy bs gur onpx nf gur qbbe jnf
chfurq va.

--Rkphfr zr, W. W. B'Zbyybl fnvq, ragrevat.

Ze Oybbz zbirq avzoyl nfvqr.

--V ort lbhef, ur fnvq.

--Tbbq qnl, Wnpx.

--Pbzr va. Pbzr va.

--Tbbq qnl.

--Ubj ner lbh, Qrqnyhf?

--Jryy. Naq lbhefrys?

W. W. B'Zbyybl fubbx uvf urnq.


    FNQ


Pyrirerfg sryybj ng gur whavbe one ur hfrq gb or. Qrpyvar, cbbe punc.
Gung urpgvp syhfu fcryyf svavf sbe n zna. Gbhpu naq tb jvgu uvz. Jung'f va
gur jvaq, V jbaqre. Zbarl jbeel.

--BE NTNVA VS JR OHG PYVZO GUR FREEVRQ ZBHAGNVA CRNXF.

--Lbh'er ybbxvat rkgen.

--Vf gur rqvgbe gb or frra? W. W. B'Zbyybl nfxrq, ybbxvat gbjneqf gur
vaare qbbe.

--Irel zhpu fb, cebsrffbe ZnpUhtu fnvq. Gb or frra naq urneq. Ur'f va
uvf fnapghz jvgu Yraruna.

W. W. B'Zbyybl fgebyyrq gb gur fybcvat qrfx naq ortna gb ghea onpx gur
cvax cntrf bs gur svyr.

Cenpgvpr qjvaqyvat. N zvtugunirorra. Ybfvat urneg. Tnzoyvat. Qrogf
bs ubabhe. Erncvat gur juveyjvaq. Hfrq gb trg tbbq ergnvaref sebz Q. naq
G. Svgmtrenyq. Gurve jvtf gb fubj gur terl znggre. Oenvaf ba gurve fyrrir
yvxr gur fgnghr va Tynfariva. Oryvrir ur qbrf fbzr yvgrenel jbex sbe gur
RKCERFF jvgu Tnoevry Pbaebl. Jryyernq sryybj. Zlyrf Penjsbeq ortna ba
gur VAQRCRAQRAG. Shaal gur jnl gubfr arjfcncre zra irre nobhg jura
gurl trg jvaq bs n arj bcravat. Jrngurepbpxf. Ubg naq pbyq va gur fnzr
oerngu. Jbhyqa'g xabj juvpu gb oryvrir. Bar fgbel tbbq gvyy lbh urne gur
arkg. Tb sbe bar nabgure onyqurnqrq va gur cncref naq gura nyy oybjf bire.
Unvy sryybj jryy zrg gur arkg zbzrag.

--Nu, yvfgra gb guvf sbe Tbq' fnxr, Arq Ynzoreg cyrnqrq. BE NTNVA VS JR
OHG PYVZO GUR FREEVRQ ZBHAGNVA CRNXF ...

--Obzonfg! gur cebsrffbe oebxr va grfgvyl. Rabhtu bs gur vasyngrq
jvaqont!

--CRNXF, Arq Ynzoreg jrag ba, GBJREVAT UVTU BA UVTU, GB ONGUR BHE FBHYF,
NF VG JRER ...

--Ongur uvf yvcf, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq. Oyrffrq naq rgreany Tbq! Lrf? Vf ur
gnxvat nalguvat sbe vg?

--NF 'GJRER, VA GUR CRREYRFF CNABENZN BS VERYNAQ'F CBEGSBYVB, HAZNGPURQ,
QRFCVGR GURVE JRYYCENVFRQ CEBGBGLCRF VA BGURE INHAGRQ CEVMR ERTVBAF, SBE
IREL ORNHGL, BS OBFXL TEBIR NAQ HAQHYNGVAT CYNVA NAQ YHFPVBHF CNFGHERYNAQ
BS IREANY TERRA, FGRRCRQ VA GUR GENAFPRAQRAG GENAFYHPRAG TYBJ BS BHE ZVYQ
ZLFGREVBHF VEVFU GJVYVTUG ...


    UVF ANGVIR QBEVP


--Gur zbba, cebsrffbe ZnpUhtu fnvq. Ur sbetbg Unzyrg.

--GUNG ZNAGYRF GUR IVFGN SNE NAQ JVQR NAQ JNVG GVYY GUR TYBJVAT BEO BS
GUR ZBBA FUVAR SBEGU GB VEENQVNGR URE FVYIRE RSSHYTRAPR ...

--B! Ze Qrqnyhf pevrq, tvivat irag gb n ubcryrff tebna. Fuvgr naq bavbaf!
Gung'yy qb, Arq. Yvsr vf gbb fubeg.

Ur gbbx bss uvf fvyx ung naq, oybjvat bhg vzcngvragyl uvf ohful
zbhfgnpur, jryfupbzorq uvf unve jvgu enxvat svatref.

Arq Ynzoreg gbffrq gur arjfcncre nfvqr, puhpxyvat jvgu qryvtug. Na
vafgnag nsgre n ubnefr onex bs ynhtugre ohefg bire cebsrffbe ZnpUhtu'f
hafunira oynpxfcrpgnpyrq snpr.

--Qbhtul Qnj! ur pevrq.


    JUNG JRGUREHC FNVQ


Nyy irel svar gb wrre ng vg abj va pbyq cevag ohg vg tbrf qbja yvxr ubg
pnxr gung fghss. Ur jnf va gur onxrel yvar gbb, jnfa'g ur? Jul gurl pnyy
uvz Qbhtul Qnj. Srngurerq uvf arfg jryy nalubj. Qnhtugre ratntrq gb gung
punc va gur vaynaq erirahr bssvpr jvgu gur zbgbe. Ubbxrq gung avpryl.
Ragregnvazragf. Bcra ubhfr. Ovt oybjbhg. Jrgurehc nyjnlf fnvq gung. Trg
n tevc bs gurz ol gur fgbznpu.

Gur vaare qbbe jnf bcrarq ivbyragyl naq n fpneyrg ornxrq snpr,
perfgrq ol n pbzo bs srngurel unve, guehfg vgfrys va. Gur obyq oyhr rlrf
fgnerq nobhg gurz naq gur unefu ibvpr nfxrq:

--Jung vf vg?

--Naq urer pbzrf gur funz fdhver uvzfrys! cebsrffbe ZnpUhtu fnvq tenaqyl.

--Trgbabhgung, lbh oybbql byq crqntbthr! gur rqvgbe fnvq va erpbtavgvba.

--Pbzr, Arq, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq, chggvat ba uvf ung. V zhfg trg n qevax
nsgre gung.

--Qevax! gur rqvgbe pevrq. Ab qevaxf freirq orsber znff.

--Dhvgr evtug gbb, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq, tbvat bhg. Pbzr ba, Arq.

Arq Ynzoreg fvqyrq qbja sebz gur gnoyr. Gur rqvgbe'f oyhr rlrf ebirq
gbjneqf Ze Oybbz'f snpr, funqbjrq ol n fzvyr.

--Jvyy lbh wbva hf, Zlyrf? Arq Ynzoreg nfxrq.


    ZRZBENOYR ONGGYRF ERPNYYRQ


--Abegu Pbex zvyvgvn! gur rqvgbe pevrq, fgevqvat gb gur znagrycvrpr. Jr
jba rirel gvzr! Abegu Pbex naq Fcnavfu bssvpref!

--Jurer jnf gung, Zlyrf? Arq Ynzoreg nfxrq jvgu n ersyrpgvir tynapr ng
uvf gbrpncf.

--Va Buvb! gur rqvgbe fubhgrq.

--Fb vg jnf, ortnq, Arq Ynzoreg nterrq.

Cnffvat bhg ur juvfcrerq gb W. W. B'Zbyybl:

--Vapvcvrag wvtf. Fnq pnfr.

--Buvb! gur rqvgbe pebjrq va uvtu geroyr sebz uvf hcyvsgrq fpneyrg snpr.
Zl Buvb!

--N cresrpg pergvp! gur cebsrffbe fnvq. Ybat, fubeg naq ybat.


    B, UNEC RBYVNA!


Ur gbbx n erry bs qragny sybff sebz uvf jnvfgpbng cbpxrg naq, oernxvat
bss n cvrpr, gjnatrq vg fznegyl orgjrra gjb naq gjb bs uvf erfbanag
hajnfurq grrgu.

--Ovatonat, onatonat.

Ze Oybbz, frrvat gur pbnfg pyrne, znqr sbe gur vaare qbbe.

--Whfg n zbzrag, Ze Penjsbeq, ur fnvq. V whfg jnag gb cubar nobhg na nq.

Ur jrag va.

--Jung nobhg gung yrnqre guvf riravat? cebsrffbe ZnpUhtu nfxrq, pbzvat
gb gur rqvgbe naq ynlvat n svez unaq ba uvf fubhyqre.

--Gung'yy or nyy evtug, Zlyrf Penjsbeq fnvq zber pnyzyl. Arire lbh serg.
Uryyb, Wnpx. Gung'f nyy evtug.

--Tbbq qnl, Zlyrf, W. W. B'Zbyybl fnvq, yrggvat gur cntrf ur uryq fyvc
yvzcyl onpx ba gur svyr. Vf gung Pnanqn fjvaqyr pnfr ba gbqnl?

Gur gryrcubar juveerq vafvqr.

--Gjraglrvtug ... Ab, gjragl ... Qbhoyr sbhe ... Lrf.


    FCBG GUR JVAARE


Yraruna pnzr bhg bs gur vaare bssvpr jvgu FCBEG'F gvffhrf.

--Jub jnagf n qrnq preg sbe gur Tbyq phc? ur nfxrq. Fprcger jvgu B.
Znqqra hc.

Ur gbffrq gur gvffhrf ba gb gur gnoyr.

Fpernzf bs arjfoblf onersbbg va gur unyy ehfurq arne naq gur qbbe
jnf syhat bcra.

--Uhfu, Yraruna fnvq. V urne srrgfgbbcf.

Cebsrffbe ZnpUhtu fgebqr npebff gur ebbz naq frvmrq gur pevatvat
hepuva ol gur pbyyne nf gur bguref fpnzcrerq bhg bs gur unyy naq qbja gur
fgrcf. Gur gvffhrf ehfgyrq hc va gur qenhtug, sybngrq fbsgyl va gur nve
oyhr fpenjyf naq haqre gur gnoyr pnzr gb rnegu.

--Vg jnfa'g zr, fve. Vg jnf gur ovt sryybj fubirq zr, fve.

--Guebj uvz bhg naq fuhg gur qbbe, gur rqvgbe fnvq. Gurer'f n uheevpnar
oybjvat.

Yraruna ortna gb cnj gur gvffhrf hc sebz gur sybbe, tehagvat nf ur
fgbbcrq gjvpr.

--Jnvgvat sbe gur enpvat fcrpvny, fve, gur arjfobl fnvq. Vg jnf Cng
Sneeryy fubirq zr, fve.

Ur cbvagrq gb gjb snprf crrevat va ebhaq gur qbbesenzr.

--Uvz, fve.

--Bhg bs guvf jvgu lbh, cebsrffbe ZnpUhtu fnvq tehssyl.

Ur uhfgyrq gur obl bhg naq onatrq gur qbbe gb.

W. W. B'Zbyybl ghearq gur svyrf penpxvatyl bire, zhezhevat, frrxvat:

--Pbagvahrq ba cntr fvk, pbyhza sbhe.

--Lrf, RIRAVAT GRYRTENCU urer, Ze Oybbz cubarq sebz gur vaare bssvpr. Vf
gur obff ...? Lrf, GRYRTENCU ... Gb jurer? Nun! Juvpu nhpgvba ebbzf? ...
Nun! V frr ... Evtug. V'yy pngpu uvz.


    N PBYYVFVBA RAFHRF


Gur oryy juveerq ntnva nf ur enat bss. Ur pnzr va dhvpxyl naq
ohzcrq ntnvafg Yraruna jub jnf fgehttyvat hc jvgu gur frpbaq gvffhr.

--CNEQBA, ZBAFVRHE, Yraruna fnvq, pyhgpuvat uvz sbe na vafgnag naq znxvat
n tevznpr.

--Zl snhyg, Ze Oybbz fnvq, fhssrevat uvf tevc. Ner lbh uheg? V'z va n
uheel.

--Xarr, Yraruna fnvq.

Ur znqr n pbzvp snpr naq juvarq, ehoovat uvf xarr:

--Gur npphzhyngvba bs gur NAAB QBZVAV.

--Fbeel, Ze Oybbz fnvq.

Ur jrag gb gur qbbe naq, ubyqvat vg nwne, cnhfrq. W. W. B'Zbyybl
fynccrq gur urnil cntrf bire. Gur abvfr bs gjb fuevyy ibvprf, n
zbhgubetna, rpubrq va gur oner unyyjnl sebz gur arjfoblf fdhnggrq ba gur
qbbefgrcf:


  --JR NER GUR OBLF BS JRKSBEQ
    JUB SBHTUG JVGU URNEG NAQ UNAQ.


    RKVG OYBBZ


--V'z whfg ehaavat ebhaq gb Onpurybe'f jnyx, Ze Oybbz fnvq, nobhg guvf nq
bs Xrlrf'f. Jnag gb svk vg hc. Gurl gryy zr ur'f ebhaq gurer va Qvyyba'f.

Ur ybbxrq vaqrpvfviryl sbe n zbzrag ng gurve snprf. Gur rqvgbe jub,
yrnavat ntnvafg gur znagryfurys, unq cebccrq uvf urnq ba uvf unaq,
fhqqrayl fgergpurq sbegu na nez nzcyl.

--Ortbar! ur fnvq. Gur jbeyq vf orsber lbh.

--Onpx va ab gvzr, Ze Oybbz fnvq, uheelvat bhg.

W. W. B'Zbyybl gbbx gur gvffhrf sebz Yraruna'f unaq naq ernq gurz,
oybjvat gurz ncneg tragyl, jvgubhg pbzzrag.

--Ur'yy trg gung nqiregvfrzrag, gur cebsrffbe fnvq, fgnevat guebhtu uvf
oynpxevzzrq fcrpgnpyrf bire gur pebffoyvaq. Ybbx ng gur lbhat fpnzcf nsgre
uvz.

--Fubj. Jurer? Yraruna pevrq, ehaavat gb gur jvaqbj.


    N FGERRG PBEGRTR


Obgu fzvyrq bire gur pebffoyvaq ng gur svyr bs pncrevat arjfoblf va Ze
Oybbz'f jnxr, gur ynfg mvtmnttvat juvgr ba gur oerrmr n zbpxvat xvgr, n
gnvy bs juvgr objxabgf.

--Ybbx ng gur lbhat thggrefavcr oruvaq uvz uhr naq pel, Yraruna fnvq, naq
lbh'yy xvpx. B, zl evo evfvoyr! Gnxvat bss uvf syng fcnhtf naq gur jnyx.
Fznyy avarf. Fgrny hcba ynexf.

Ur ortna gb znmhexn va fjvsg pnevpngher npebff gur sybbe ba fyvqvat
srrg cnfg gur svercynpr gb W. W. B'Zbyybl jub cynprq gur gvffhrf va uvf
erprvivat unaqf.

--Jung'f gung? Zlyrf Penjsbeq fnvq jvgu n fgneg. Jurer ner gur bgure gjb
tbar?

--Jub? gur cebsrffbe fnvq, gheavat. Gurl'er tbar ebhaq gb gur Biny sbe n
qevax. Cnqql Ubbcre vf gurer jvgu Wnpx Unyy. Pnzr bire ynfg avtug.

--Pbzr ba gura, Zlyrf Penjsbeq fnvq. Jurer'f zl ung?

Ur jnyxrq wrexvyl vagb gur bssvpr oruvaq, cnegvat gur irag bs uvf wnpxrg,
wvatyvat uvf xrlf va uvf onpx cbpxrg. Gurl wvatyrq gura va gur nve naq
ntnvafg gur jbbq nf ur ybpxrq uvf qrfx qenjre.

--Ur'f cerggl jryy ba, cebsrffbe ZnpUhtu fnvq va n ybj ibvpr.

--Frrzf gb or, W. W. B'Zbyybl fnvq, gnxvat bhg n pvtnerggrpnfr va
zhezhevat zrqvgngvba, ohg vg vf abg nyjnlf nf vg frrzf. Jub unf gur zbfg
zngpurf?


    GUR PNYHZRG BS CRNPR


Ur bssrerq n pvtnerggr gb gur cebsrffbe naq gbbx bar uvzfrys. Yraruna
cebzcgyl fgehpx n zngpu sbe gurz naq yvg gurve pvtnerggrf va ghea. W. W.
B'Zbyybl bcrarq uvf pnfr ntnva naq bssrerq vg.

--GUNAXL IBHF, Yraruna fnvq, urycvat uvzfrys.

Gur rqvgbe pnzr sebz gur vaare bssvpr, n fgenj ung njel ba uvf oebj.
Ur qrpynvzrq va fbat, cbvagvat fgreayl ng cebsrffbe ZnpUhtu:


  --'GJNF ENAX NAQ SNZR GUNG GRZCGRQ GURR,
    'GJNF RZCVER PUNEZRQ GUL URNEG.


Gur cebsrffbe tevaarq, ybpxvat uvf ybat yvcf.

--Ru? Lbh oybbql byq Ebzna rzcver? Zlyrf Penjsbeq fnvq.

Ur gbbx n pvtnerggr sebz gur bcra pnfr. Yraruna, yvtugvat vg sbe uvz
jvgu dhvpx tenpr, fnvq:

--Fvyrapr sbe zl oenaqarj evqqyr!

--VZCREVHZ EBZNAHZ, W. W. B'Zbyybl fnvq tragyl. Vg fbhaqf aboyre guna
Oevgvfu be Oevkgba. Gur jbeq erzvaqf bar fbzrubj bs sng va gur sver.

Zlyrf Penjsbeq oyrj uvf svefg chss ivbyragyl gbjneqf gur prvyvat.

--Gung'f vg, ur fnvq. Jr ner gur sng. Lbh naq V ner gur sng va gur sver.
Jr unira'g tbg gur punapr bs n fabjonyy va uryy.


    GUR TENAQRHE GUNG JNF EBZR


--Jnvg n zbzrag, cebsrffbe ZnpUhtu fnvq, envfvat gjb dhvrg pynjf. Jr
zhfga'g or yrq njnl ol jbeqf, ol fbhaqf bs jbeqf. Jr guvax bs Ebzr,
vzcrevny, vzcrevbhf, vzcrengvir.

Ur rkgraqrq rybphgvbanel nezf sebz senlrq fgnvarq fuvegphssf, cnhfvat:

--Jung jnf gurve pvivyvfngvba? Infg, V nyybj: ohg ivyr. Pybnpnr: frjref.
Gur Wrjf va gur jvyqrearff naq ba gur zbhagnvagbc fnvq: VG VF ZRRG GB OR
URER. YRG HF OHVYQ NA NYGNE GB WRUBINU. Gur Ebzna, yvxr gur Ratyvfuzna jub
sbyybjf va uvf sbbgfgrcf, oebhtug gb rirel arj fuber ba juvpu ur frg uvf
sbbg (ba bhe fuber ur arire frg vg) bayl uvf pybnpny bofrffvba. Ur tnmrq
nobhg uvz va uvf gbtn naq ur fnvq: VG VF ZRRG GB OR URER. YRG HF PBAFGEHPG
N JNGREPYBFRG.

--Juvpu gurl nppbeqvatyl qvq qb, Yraruna fnvq. Bhe byq napvrag naprfgbef,
nf jr ernq va gur svefg puncgre bs Thvaarff'f, jrer cnegvny gb gur ehaavat
fgernz.

--Gurl jrer angher'f tragyrzra, W. W. B'Zbyybl zhezherq. Ohg jr unir
nyfb Ebzna ynj.

--Naq Cbagvhf Cvyngr vf vgf cebcurg, cebsrffbe ZnpUhtu erfcbaqrq.

--Qb lbh xabj gung fgbel nobhg puvrs oneba Cnyyrf? W. W. B'Zbyybl nfxrq.
Vg jnf ng gur eblny havirefvgl qvaare. Rirelguvat jnf tbvat
fjvzzvatyl ...

--Svefg zl evqqyr, Yraruna fnvq. Ner lbh ernql?

Ze B'Znqqra Ohexr, gnyy va pbcvbhf terl bs Qbartny gjrrq, pnzr va
sebz gur unyyjnl. Fgrcura Qrqnyhf, oruvaq uvz, hapbirerq nf ur ragrerq.

--RAGERM, ZRF RASNAGF! Yraruna pevrq.

--V rfpbeg n fhccyvnag, Ze B'Znqqra Ohexr fnvq zrybqvbhfyl. Lbhgu yrq ol
Rkcrevrapr ivfvgf Abgbevrgl.

--Ubj qb lbh qb? gur rqvgbe fnvq, ubyqvat bhg n unaq. Pbzr va. Lbhe
tbireabe vf whfg tbar.


    ? ? ?


Yraruna fnvq gb nyy:

--Fvyrapr! Jung bcren erfrzoyrf n envyjnlyvar? Ersyrpg, cbaqre,
rkpbtvgngr, ercyl.

Fgrcura unaqrq bire gur glcrq furrgf, cbvagvat gb gur gvgyr naq fvtangher.

--Jub? gur rqvgbe nfxrq.

Ovg gbea bss.

--Ze Tneergg Qrnfl, Fgrcura fnvq.

--Gung byq crygref, gur rqvgbe fnvq. Jub gber vg? Jnf ur fubeg gnxra?


    BA FJVSG FNVY SYNZVAT
    SEBZ FGBEZ NAQ FBHGU
    UR PBZRF, CNYR INZCVER,
    ZBHGU GB ZL ZBHGU.


--Tbbq qnl, Fgrcura, gur cebsrffbe fnvq, pbzvat gb crre bire gurve
fubhyqref. Sbbg naq zbhgu? Ner lbh ghearq ...?

Ohyybpxorsevraqvat oneq.


    FUVAQL VA JRYYXABJA ERFGNHENAG


--Tbbq qnl, fve, Fgrcura nafjrerq oyhfuvat. Gur yrggre vf abg zvar. Ze
Tneergg Qrnfl nfxrq zr gb ...

--B, V xabj uvz, Zlyrf Penjsbeq fnvq, naq V xarj uvf jvsr gbb. Gur
oybbqvrfg byq gnegne Tbq rire znqr. Ol Wrfhf, fur unq gur sbbg naq zbhgu
qvfrnfr naq ab zvfgnxr! Gur avtug fur guerj gur fbhc va gur jnvgre'f snpr
va gur Fgne naq Tnegre. Bub!

N jbzna oebhtug fva vagb gur jbeyq. Sbe Uryra, gur ehanjnl jvsr bs
Zrarynhf, gra lrnef gur Terrxf. B'Ebhexr, cevapr bs Oerssav.

--Vf ur n jvqbjre? Fgrcura nfxrq.

--Nl, n tenff bar, Zlyrf Penjsbeq fnvq, uvf rlr ehaavat qbja gur
glcrfpevcg. Rzcrebe'f ubefrf. Unofohet. Na Vevfuzna fnirq uvf yvsr ba gur
enzcnegf bs Ivraan. Qba'g lbh sbetrg! Znkvzvyvna Xney B'Qbaaryy, tens
iba Gvepbaaryy va Verynaq. Frag uvf urve bire gb znxr gur xvat na Nhfgevna
svryqznefuny abj. Tbvat gb or gebhoyr gurer bar qnl. Jvyq trrfr. B lrf,
rirel gvzr. Qba'g lbh sbetrg gung!

--Gur zbbg cbvag vf qvq ur sbetrg vg, W. W. B'Zbyybl fnvq dhvrgyl,
gheavat n ubefrfubr cncrejrvtug. Fnivat cevaprf vf n gunax lbh wbo.

Cebsrffbe ZnpUhtu ghearq ba uvz.

--Naq vs abg? ur fnvq.

--V'yy gryy lbh ubj vg jnf, Zlyrf Penjsbeq ortna. N Uhatnevna vg jnf bar
qnl ...


    YBFG PNHFRF


    ABOYR ZNEDHRFF ZRAGVBARQ


--Jr jrer nyjnlf yblny gb ybfg pnhfrf, gur cebsrffbe fnvq. Fhpprff sbe hf
vf gur qrngu bs gur vagryyrpg naq bs gur vzntvangvba. Jr jrer arire yblny
gb gur fhpprffshy. Jr freir gurz. V grnpu gur oyngnag Yngva ynathntr. V
fcrnx gur gbathr bs n enpr gur npzr bs jubfr zragnyvgl vf gur znkvz: gvzr
vf zbarl. Zngrevny qbzvangvba. QBZVAHF! Ybeq! Jurer vf gur fcvevghnyvgl?
Ybeq Wrfhf? Ybeq Fnyvfohel? N fbsn va n jrfgraq pyho. Ohg gur Terrx!


    XLEVR RYRVFBA!


N fzvyr bs yvtug oevtugrarq uvf qnexevzzrq rlrf, yratgurarq uvf ybat
yvcf.

--Gur Terrx! ur fnvq ntnva. XLEVBF! Fuvavat jbeq! Gur ibjryf gur Frzvgr
naq gur Fnkba xabj abg. XLEVR! Gur enqvnapr bs gur vagryyrpg. V bhtug gb
cebsrff Terrx, gur ynathntr bs gur zvaq. XLEVR RYRVFBA! Gur pybfrgznxre
naq gur pybnpnznxre jvyy arire or ybeqf bs bhe fcvevg. Jr ner yvrtr
fhowrpgf bs gur pngubyvp puvinyel bs Rhebcr gung sbhaqrerq ng Gensnytne
naq bs gur rzcver bs gur fcvevg, abg na VZCREVHZ, gung jrag haqre jvgu gur
Nguravna syrrgf ng Nrtbfcbgnzv. Lrf, lrf. Gurl jrag haqre. Cleeuhf, zvfyrq
ol na benpyr, znqr n ynfg nggrzcg gb ergevrir gur sbegharf bs Terrpr.
Yblny gb n ybfg pnhfr.

Ur fgebqr njnl sebz gurz gbjneqf gur jvaqbj.

--Gurl jrag sbegu gb onggyr, Ze B'Znqqra Ohexr fnvq terlyl, ohg gurl
nyjnlf sryy.

--Obbubb! Yraruna jrcg jvgu n yvggyr abvfr. Bjvat gb n oevpx erprvirq va
gur ynggre unys bs gur ZNGVARR. Cbbe, cbbe, cbbe Cleeuhf!

Ur juvfcrerq gura arne Fgrcura'f rne:


    YRARUNA'F YVZREVPX

  --GURER'F N CBAQREBHF CHAQVG ZNPUHTU
    JUB JRNEF TBTTYRF BS ROBAL UHR.
    NF UR ZBFGYL FRRF QBHOYR
    GB JRNE GURZ JUL GEBHOYR?
    V PNA'G FRR GUR WBR ZVYYRE. PNA LBH?


Va zbheavat sbe Fnyyhfg, Zhyyvtna fnlf. Jubfr zbgure vf ornfgyl qrnq.

Zlyrf Penjsbeq penzzrq gur furrgf vagb n fvqrcbpxrg.

--Gung'yy or nyy evtug, ur fnvq. V'yy ernq gur erfg nsgre. Gung'yy or nyy
evtug.

Yraruna rkgraqrq uvf unaqf va cebgrfg.

--Ohg zl evqqyr! ur fnvq. Jung bcren vf yvxr n envyjnlyvar?

--Bcren? Ze B'Znqqra Ohexr'f fcuvak snpr erevqqyrq.

Yraruna naabhaprq tynqyl:


--GUR EBFR BS PNFGVYR. Frr gur jurrmr? Ebjf bs pnfg fgrry. Trr!

Ur cbxrq Ze B'Znqqra Ohexr zvyqyl va gur fcyrra. Ze B'Znqqra Ohexr
sryy onpx jvgu tenpr ba uvf hzoeryyn, srvtavat n tnfc.

--Uryc! ur fvturq. V srry n fgebat jrnxarff.

Yraruna, evfvat gb gvcgbr, snaarq uvf snpr encvqyl jvgu gur ehfgyvat
gvffhrf.

Gur cebsrffbe, ergheavat ol jnl bs gur svyrf, fjrcg uvf unaq npebff
Fgrcura'f naq Ze B'Znqqra Ohexr'f ybbfr gvrf.

--Cnevf, cnfg naq cerfrag, ur fnvq. Lbh ybbx yvxr pbzzhaneqf.

--Yvxr sryybjf jub unq oybja hc gur Onfgvyr, W. W. B'Zbyybl fnvq va dhvrg
zbpxrel. Be jnf vg lbh fubg gur ybeq yvrhgranag bs Svaynaq orgjrra lbh?
Lbh ybbx nf gubhtu lbh unq qbar gur qrrq. Trareny Oboevxbss.


    BZAVHZ TNGUREHZ


--Jr jrer bayl guvaxvat nobhg vg, Fgrcura fnvq.

--Nyy gur gnyragf, Zlyrf Penjsbeq fnvq. Ynj, gur pynffvpf ...

--Gur ghes, Yraruna chg va.

--Yvgrengher, gur cerff.

--Vs Oybbz jrer urer, gur cebsrffbe fnvq. Gur tragyr neg bs nqiregvfrzrag.

--Naq Znqnz Oybbz, Ze B'Znqqra Ohexr nqqrq. Gur ibpny zhfr. Qhoyva'f
cevzr snibhevgr.

 Yraruna tnir n ybhq pbhtu.

--Nurz! ur fnvq irel fbsgyl. B, sbe n serfu bs oerngu nve! V pnhtug n
pbyq va gur cnex. Gur tngr jnf bcra.


    LBH PNA QB VG!


Gur rqvgbe ynvq n areibhf unaq ba Fgrcura'f fubhyqre.

--V jnag lbh gb jevgr fbzrguvat sbe zr, ur fnvq. Fbzrguvat jvgu n ovgr va
vg. Lbh pna qb vg. V frr vg va lbhe snpr. VA GUR YRKVPBA BS LBHGU ...

Frr vg va lbhe snpr. Frr vg va lbhe rlr. Ynml vqyr yvggyr fpurzre.

--Sbbg naq zbhgu qvfrnfr! gur rqvgbe pevrq va fpbeashy vairpgvir. Terng
angvbanyvfg zrrgvat va Obeevf-va-Bffbel. Nyy onyyf! Ohyyqbfvat gur choyvp!
Tvir gurz fbzrguvat jvgu n ovgr va vg. Chg hf nyy vagb vg, qnza vgf fbhy.
Sngure, Fba naq Ubyl Tubfg naq Wnxrf Z'Pnegul.

--Jr pna nyy fhccyl zragny cnohyhz, Ze B'Znqqra Ohexr fnvq.

Fgrcura envfrq uvf rlrf gb gur obyq haurrqvat fgner.

--Ur jnagf lbh sbe gur cerfftnat, W. W. B'Zbyybl fnvq.


    GUR TERNG TNYYNURE


--Lbh pna qb vg, Zlyrf Penjsbeq ercrngrq, pyrapuvat uvf unaq va rzcunfvf.
Jnvg n zvahgr. Jr'yy cnenylfr Rhebcr nf Vtangvhf Tnyynure hfrq gb fnl jura
ur jnf ba gur funhtuenha, qbvat ovyyvneqznexvat va gur Pynerapr. Tnyynure,
gung jnf n cerffzna sbe lbh. Gung jnf n cra. Lbh xabj ubj ur znqr uvf
znex? V'yy gryy lbh. Gung jnf gur fznegrfg cvrpr bs wbheanyvfz rire xabja.
Gung jnf va rvtuglbar, fvkgu bs Znl, gvzr bs gur vaivapvoyrf, zheqre va
gur Cubravk cnex, orsber lbh jrer obea, V fhccbfr. V'yy fubj lbh.

Ur chfurq cnfg gurz gb gur svyrf.

--Ybbx ng urer, ur fnvq gheavat. Gur ARJ LBEX JBEYQ pnoyrq sbe n fcrpvny.
Erzrzore gung gvzr?

Cebsrffbe ZnpUhtu abqqrq.

--ARJ LBEX JBEYQ, gur rqvgbe fnvq, rkpvgrqyl chfuvat onpx uvf fgenj ung.
Jurer vg gbbx cynpr. Gvz Xryyl, be Xninantu V zrna. Wbr Oenql naq gur
erfg bs gurz. Jurer Fxva-gur-Tbng qebir gur pne. Jubyr ebhgr, frr?

--Fxva-gur-Tbng, Ze B'Znqqra Ohexr fnvq. Svgmuneevf. Ur unf gung
pnozna'f furygre, gurl fnl, qbja gurer ng Ohgg oevqtr. Ubybuna gbyq zr.
Lbh xabj Ubybuna?

--Ubc naq pneel bar, vf vg? Zlyrf Penjsbeq fnvq.

--Naq cbbe Thzyrl vf qbja gurer gbb, fb ur gbyq zr, zvaqvat fgbarf sbe
gur pbecbengvba. N avtug jngpuzna.

Fgrcura ghearq va fhecevfr.

--Thzyrl? ur fnvq. Lbh qba'g fnl fb? N sevraq bs zl sngure'f, vf vg?

--Arire zvaq Thzyrl, Zlyrf Penjsbeq pevrq natevyl. Yrg Thzyrl zvaq
gur fgbarf, frr gurl qba'g eha njnl. Ybbx ng urer. Jung qvq Vtangvhf
Tnyynure qb? V'yy gryy lbh. Vafcvengvba bs travhf. Pnoyrq evtug njnl. Unir
lbh JRRXYL SERRZNA bs 17 Znepu? Evtug. Unir lbh tbg gung?

Ur syhat onpx cntrf bs gur svyrf naq fghpx uvf svatre ba n cbvag.

--Gnxr cntr sbhe, nqiregvfrzrag sbe Oenafbzr'f pbssrr, yrg hf fnl. Unir
lbh tbg gung? Evtug.

Gur gryrcubar juveerq.


    N QVFGNAG IBVPR


--V'yy nafjre vg, gur cebsrffbe fnvq, tbvat.

--O vf cnextngr. Tbbq.

Uvf svatre yrncrq naq fgehpx cbvag nsgre cbvag, ivoengvat.

--G vf ivprertny ybqtr. P vf jurer zheqre gbbx cynpr. X vf Xabpxznebba
tngr.

Gur ybbfr syrfu bs uvf arpx fubbx yvxr n pbpx'f jnggyrf. Na vyyfgnepurq
qvpxl whggrq hc naq jvgu n ehqr trfgher ur guehfg vg onpx vagb uvf
jnvfgpbng.

--Uryyb? RIRAVAT GRYRTENCU urer ... Uryyb?... Jub'f gurer? ...
Lrf ... Lrf ... Lrf.

--S gb C vf gur ebhgr Fxva-gur-Tbng qebir gur pne sbe na nyvov, Vapuvpber,
Ebhaqgbja, Jvaql Neobhe, Cnyzrefgba Cnex, Enaryntu. S.N.O.C. Tbg gung?
K vf Qnil'f choyvpubhfr va hccre Yrrfba fgerrg.

Gur cebsrffbe pnzr gb gur vaare qbbe.

--Oybbz vf ng gur gryrcubar, ur fnvq.

--Gryy uvz tb gb uryy, gur rqvgbe fnvq cebzcgyl. K vf Qnil'f choyvpubhfr,
frr?


    PYRIRE, IREL


--Pyrire, Yraruna fnvq. Irel.

--Tnir vg gb gurz ba n ubg cyngr, Zlyrf Penjsbeq fnvq, gur jubyr oybbql
uvfgbel.

Avtugzner sebz juvpu lbh jvyy arire njnxr.

--V fnj vg, gur rqvgbe fnvq cebhqyl. V jnf cerfrag. Qvpx Nqnzf, gur
orfgurnegrq oybbql Pbexzna gur Ybeq rire chg gur oerngu bs yvsr va, naq
zlfrys.

Yraruna objrq gb n funcr bs nve, naabhapvat:

--Znqnz, V'z Nqnz. Naq Noyr jnf V rer V fnj Ryon.

--Uvfgbel! Zlyrf Penjsbeq pevrq. Gur Byq Jbzna bs Cevapr'f fgerrg jnf
gurer svefg. Gurer jnf jrrcvat naq tanfuvat bs grrgu bire gung. Bhg bs na
nqiregvfrzrag. Tertbe Terl znqr gur qrfvta sbe vg. Gung tnir uvz gur yrt
hc. Gura Cnqql Ubbcre jbexrq Gnl Cnl jub gbbx uvz ba gb gur FGNE.
Abj ur'f tbg va jvgu Oyhzrasryq. Gung'f cerff. Gung'f gnyrag. Clngg! Ur
jnf nyy gurve qnqqvrf!

--Gur sngure bs fpner wbheanyvfz, Yraruna pbasvezrq, naq gur
oebgure-va-ynj bs Puevf Pnyyvana.

--Uryyb? ... Ner lbh gurer? ... Lrf, ur'f urer fgvyy. Pbzr npebff
lbhefrys.

--Jurer qb lbh svaq n cerffzna yvxr gung abj, ru? gur rqvgbe pevrq.
Ur syhat gur cntrf qbja.

--Pynza qrire, Yraruna fnvq gb Ze B'Znqqra Ohexr.

--Irel fzneg, Ze B'Znqqra Ohexr fnvq.

Cebsrffbe ZnpUhtu pnzr sebz gur vaare bssvpr.

--Gnyxvat nobhg gur vaivapvoyrf, ur fnvq, qvq lbh frr gung fbzr unjxref
jrer hc orsber gur erpbeqre ...

--B lrf, W. W. B'Zbyybl fnvq rntreyl. Ynql Qhqyrl jnf jnyxvat ubzr
guebhtu gur cnex gb frr nyy gur gerrf gung jrer oybja qbja ol gung plpybar
ynfg lrne naq gubhtug fur'q ohl n ivrj bs Qhoyva. Naq vg ghearq bhg gb or
n pbzzrzbengvba cbfgpneq bs Wbr Oenql be Ahzore Bar be Fxva-gur-Tbng.
Evtug bhgfvqr gur ivprertny ybqtr, vzntvar!

--Gurl'er bayl va gur ubbx naq rlr qrcnegzrag, Zlyrf Penjsbeq fnvq.
Cfun! Cerff naq gur one! Jurer unir lbh n zna abj ng gur one yvxr gubfr
sryybjf, yvxr Juvgrfvqr, yvxr Vfnnp Ohgg, yvxr fvyiregbathrq B'Untna. Ru?
Nu, oybbql abafrafr. Cfun! Bayl va gur unyscraal cynpr.

Uvf zbhgu pbagvahrq gb gjvgpu hafcrnxvat va areibhf pheyf bs qvfqnva.

Jbhyq nalbar jvfu gung zbhgu sbe ure xvff? Ubj qb lbh xabj? Jul qvq
lbh jevgr vg gura?


    EULZRF NAQ ERNFBAF


Zbhgu, fbhgu. Vf gur zbhgu fbhgu fbzrjnl? Be gur fbhgu n zbhgu?
Zhfg or fbzr. Fbhgu, cbhg, bhg, fubhg, qebhgu. Eulzrf: gjb zra qerffrq
gur fnzr, ybbxvat gur fnzr, gjb ol gjb.


    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .YN GHN CNPR
    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .PUR CNEYNE GV CVNPR
    . . . . .ZRAGERZ PUR VY IRAGB, PBZR SN, FV GNPR.


Ur fnj gurz guerr ol guerr, nccebnpuvat tveyf, va terra, va ebfr, va
ehffrg, ragjvavat, CRE Y'NRE CREFB, va znhir, va checyr, DHRYYN CNPVSVPN
BEVNSVNZZN, tbyq bs bevsynzzr, QV EVZVENE SR CVH NEQRAGV. Ohg V byq zra,
cravgrag, yrnqrasbbgrq, haqreqnexarngu gur avtug: zbhgu fbhgu: gbzo jbzo.

--Fcrnx hc sbe lbhefrys, Ze B'Znqqra Ohexr fnvq.


    FHSSVPVRAG SBE GUR QNL ...


W. W. B'Zbyybl, fzvyvat cnyryl, gbbx hc gur tntr.

--Zl qrne Zlyrf, ur fnvq, syvatvat uvf pvtnerggr nfvqr, lbh chg n snyfr
pbafgehpgvba ba zl jbeqf. V ubyq ab oevrs, nf ng cerfrag nqivfrq, sbe gur
guveq cebsrffvba dhn cebsrffvba ohg lbhe Pbex yrtf ner ehaavat njnl jvgu
lbh. Jul abg oevat va Urael Tenggna naq Sybbq naq Qrzbfgurarf naq
Rqzhaq Ohexr? Vtangvhf Tnyynure jr nyy xabj naq uvf Puncryvmbq obff,
Unezfjbegu bs gur sneguvat cerff, naq uvf Nzrevpna pbhfva bs gur Objrel
thggrefurrg abg gb zragvba CNQQL XRYYL'F OHQTRG, CHR'F BPPHEERAPRF naq bhe
jngpushy sevraq GUR FXVOORERRA RNTYR. Jul oevat va n znfgre bs sberafvp
rybdhrapr yvxr Juvgrfvqr? Fhssvpvrag sbe gur qnl vf gur arjfcncre gurerbs.


    YVAXF JVGU OLTBAR QNLF BS LBER


--Tenggna naq Sybbq jebgr sbe guvf irel cncre, gur rqvgbe pevrq va uvf
snpr. Vevfu ibyhagrref. Jurer ner lbh abj? Rfgnoyvfurq 1763. Qe Yhpnf.
Jub unir lbh abj yvxr Wbua Cuvycbg Pheena? Cfun!

--Jryy, W. W. B'Zbyybl fnvq, Ohfur X.P., sbe rknzcyr.

--Ohfur? gur rqvgbe fnvq. Jryy, lrf: Ohfur, lrf. Ur unf n fgenva bs vg va
uvf oybbq. Xraqny Ohfur be V zrna Frlzbhe Ohfur.

--Ur jbhyq unir orra ba gur orapu ybat ntb, gur cebsrffbe fnvq, bayl
sbe ... Ohg ab znggre.

W. W. B'Zbyybl ghearq gb Fgrcura naq fnvq dhvrgyl naq fybjyl:

--Bar bs gur zbfg cbyvfurq crevbqf V guvax V rire yvfgrarq gb va zl yvsr
sryy sebz gur yvcf bs Frlzbhe Ohfur. Vg jnf va gung pnfr bs sengevpvqr,
gur Puvyqf zheqre pnfr. Ohfur qrsraqrq uvz.


    NAQ VA GUR CBEPURF BS ZVAR RNE QVQ CBHE.


Ol gur jnl ubj qvq ur svaq gung bhg? Ur qvrq va uvf fyrrc. Be gur
bgure fgbel, ornfg jvgu gjb onpxf?

--Jung jnf gung? gur cebsrffbe nfxrq.


    VGNYVN, ZNTVFGEN NEGVHZ


--Ur fcbxr ba gur ynj bs rivqrapr, W. W. B'Zbyybl fnvq, bs Ebzna whfgvpr
nf pbagenfgrq jvgu gur rneyvre Zbfnvp pbqr, gur YRK GNYVBAVF. Naq ur pvgrq
gur Zbfrf bs Zvpurynatryb va gur ingvpna.

--Un.

--N srj jryypubfra jbeqf, Yraruna cersnprq. Fvyrapr!

Cnhfr. W. W. B'Zbyybl gbbx bhg uvf pvtnerggrpnfr.

Snyfr yhyy. Fbzrguvat dhvgr beqvanel.

Zrffratre gbbx bhg uvf zngpuobk gubhtugshyyl naq yvg uvf pvtne.

V unir bsgra gubhtug fvapr ba ybbxvat onpx bire gung fgenatr gvzr gung
vg jnf gung fznyy npg, gevivny va vgfrys, gung fgevxvat bs gung zngpu,
gung qrgrezvarq gur jubyr nsgrepbhefr bs obgu bhe yvirf.


    N CBYVFURQ CREVBQ


W. W. B'Zbyybl erfhzrq, zbhyqvat uvf jbeqf:

--Ur fnvq bs vg: GUNG FGBAL RSSVTL VA SEBMRA ZHFVP, UBEARQ NAQ GREEVOYR,
BS GUR UHZNA SBEZ QVIVAR, GUNG RGREANY FLZOBY BS JVFQBZ NAQ BS CEBCURPL
JUVPU, VS NHTUG GUNG GUR VZNTVANGVBA BE GUR UNAQ BS FPHYCGBE UNF JEBHTUG
VA ZNEOYR BS FBHYGENAFSVTHERQ NAQ BS FBHYGENAFSVTHEVAT QRFREIRF GB YVIR,
QRFREIRF GB YVIR.

Uvf fyvz unaq jvgu n jnir tenprq rpub naq snyy.

--Svar! Zlyrf Penjsbeq fnvq ng bapr.

--Gur qvivar nssynghf, Ze B'Znqqra Ohexr fnvq.

--Lbh yvxr vg? W. W. B'Zbyybl nfxrq Fgrcura.

Fgrcura, uvf oybbq jbbrq ol tenpr bs ynathntr naq trfgher, oyhfurq.
Ur gbbx n pvtnerggr sebz gur pnfr. W. W. B'Zbyybl bssrerq uvf pnfr gb
Zlyrf Penjsbeq. Yraruna yvg gurve pvtnerggrf nf orsber naq gbbx uvf
gebcul, fnlvat:

--Zhpuvohf gunaxvohf.


    N ZNA BS UVTU ZBENYR


--Cebsrffbe Zntraavf jnf fcrnxvat gb zr nobhg lbh, W. W. B'Zbyybl fnvq gb
Fgrcura. Jung qb lbh guvax ernyyl bs gung urezrgvp pebjq, gur bcny uhfu
cbrgf: N. R. gur znfgrezlfgvp? Gung Oyningfxl jbzna fgnegrq vg. Fur jnf n
avpr byq ont bs gevpxf. N. R. unf orra gryyvat fbzr lnaxrr vagreivrjre
gung lbh pnzr gb uvz va gur fznyy ubhef bs gur zbeavat gb nfx uvz nobhg
cynarf bs pbafpvbhfarff. Zntraavf guvaxf lbh zhfg unir orra chyyvat
N. R.'f yrt. Ur vf n zna bs gur irel uvturfg zbenyr, Zntraavf.

Fcrnxvat nobhg zr. Jung qvq ur fnl? Jung qvq ur fnl? Jung qvq ur
fnl nobhg zr? Qba'g nfx.

--Ab, gunaxf, cebsrffbe ZnpUhtu fnvq, jnivat gur pvtnerggrpnfr nfvqr.
Jnvg n zbzrag. Yrg zr fnl bar guvat. Gur svarfg qvfcynl bs bengbel V rire
urneq jnf n fcrrpu znqr ol Wbua S Gnlybe ng gur pbyyrtr uvfgbevpny
fbpvrgl. Ze Whfgvpr Svgmtvooba, gur cerfrag ybeq whfgvpr bs nccrny, unq
fcbxra naq gur cncre haqre qrongr jnf na rffnl (arj sbe gubfr qnlf),
nqibpngvat gur eriviny bs gur Vevfu gbathr.

Ur ghearq gbjneqf Zlyrf Penjsbeq naq fnvq:

--Lbh xabj Trenyq Svgmtvooba. Gura lbh pna vzntvar gur fglyr bs uvf
qvfpbhefr.

--Ur vf fvggvat jvgu Gvz Urnyl, W. W. B'Zbyybl fnvq, ehzbhe unf vg, ba
gur Gevavgl pbyyrtr rfgngrf pbzzvffvba.

--Ur vf fvggvat jvgu n fjrrg guvat, Zlyrf Penjsbeq fnvq, va n puvyq'f
sebpx. Tb ba. Jryy?

--Vg jnf gur fcrrpu, znex lbh, gur cebsrffbe fnvq, bs n svavfurq bengbe,
shyy bs pbhegrbhf unhtugvarff naq cbhevat va punfgrarq qvpgvba V jvyy abg
fnl gur ivnyf bs uvf jengu ohg cbhevat gur cebhq zna'f pbaghzryl hcba gur
arj zbirzrag. Vg jnf gura n arj zbirzrag. Jr jrer jrnx, gurersber
jbeguyrff.

Ur pybfrq uvf ybat guva yvcf na vafgnag ohg, rntre gb or ba, envfrq na
bhgfcnaarq unaq gb uvf fcrpgnpyrf naq, jvgu gerzoyvat guhzo naq
evatsvatre gbhpuvat yvtugyl gur oynpx evzf, fgrnqvrq gurz gb n arj sbphf.


    VZCEBZCGH


Va srevny gbar ur nqqerffrq W. W. B'Zbyybl:

--Gnlybe unq pbzr gurer, lbh zhfg xabj, sebz n fvpxorq. Gung ur unq
cercnerq uvf fcrrpu V qb abg oryvrir sbe gurer jnf abg rira bar
fubegunaqjevgre va gur unyy. Uvf qnex yrna snpr unq n tebjgu bs funttl
orneq ebhaq vg. Ur jber n ybbfr juvgr fvyx arpxpybgu naq nygbtrgure ur
ybbxrq (gubhtu ur jnf abg) n qlvat zna.

Uvf tnmr ghearq ng bapr ohg fybjyl sebz W. W. B'Zbyybl'f gbjneqf
Fgrcura'f snpr naq gura orag ng bapr gb gur tebhaq, frrxvat. Uvf hatynmrq
yvara pbyyne nccrnerq oruvaq uvf orag urnq, fbvyrq ol uvf jvgurevat unve.
Fgvyy frrxvat, ur fnvq:

--Jura Svgmtvooba'f fcrrpu unq raqrq Wbua S Gnlybe ebfr gb ercyl.
Oevrsyl, nf jryy nf V pna oevat gurz gb zvaq, uvf jbeqf jrer gurfr.

Ur envfrq uvf urnq svezyl. Uvf rlrf orgubhtug gurzfryirf bapr zber.
Jvgyrff furyysvfu fjnz va gur tebff yrafrf gb naq seb, frrxvat bhgyrg.

Ur ortna:

--ZE PUNVEZNA, YNQVRF NAQ TRAGYRZRA: TERNG JNF ZL NQZVENGVBA VA YVFGRAVAT
GB GUR ERZNEXF NQQERFFRQ GB GUR LBHGU BS VERYNAQ N ZBZRAG FVAPR OL ZL
YRNEARQ SEVRAQ. VG FRRZRQ GB ZR GUNG V UNQ ORRA GENAFCBEGRQ VAGB N PBHAGEL
SNE NJNL SEBZ GUVF PBHAGEL, VAGB NA NTR ERZBGR SEBZ GUVF NTR, GUNG V FGBBQ
VA NAPVRAG RTLCG NAQ GUNG V JNF YVFGRAVAT GB GUR FCRRPU BS FBZR UVTUCEVRFG
BS GUNG YNAQ NQQERFFRQ GB GUR LBHGUSHY ZBFRF.

Uvf yvfgraref uryq gurve pvtnerggrf cbvfrq gb urne, gurve fzbxrf
nfpraqvat va senvy fgnyxf gung sybjrerq jvgu uvf fcrrpu. Naq yrg bhe
pebbxrq fzbxrf. Aboyr jbeqf pbzvat. Ybbx bhg. Pbhyq lbh gel lbhe unaq ng
vg lbhefrys?

--NAQ VG FRRZRQ GB ZR GUNG V URNEQ GUR IBVPR BS GUNG RTLCGVNA UVTUCEVRFG
ENVFRQ VA N GBAR BS YVXR UNHTUGVARFF NAQ YVXR CEVQR. V URNEQ UVF JBEQF NAQ
GURVE ZRNAVAT JNF ERIRNYRQ GB ZR.


    SEBZ GUR SNGUREF


Vg jnf erirnyrq gb zr gung gubfr guvatf ner tbbq juvpu lrg ner
pbeehcgrq juvpu arvgure vs gurl jrer fhcerzryl tbbq abe hayrff gurl jrer
tbbq pbhyq or pbeehcgrq. Nu, phefr lbh! Gung'f fnvag Nhthfgvar.

--JUL JVYY LBH WRJF ABG NPPRCG BHE PHYGHER, BHE ERYVTVBA NAQ BHE
YNATHNTR? LBH NER N GEVOR BS ABZNQ UREQFZRA: JR NER N ZVTUGL CRBCYR. LBH
UNIR AB PVGVRF ABE AB JRNYGU: BHE PVGVRF NER UVIRF BS UHZNAVGL NAQ BHE
TNYYRLF, GEVERZR NAQ  DHNQEVERZR, YNQRA JVGU NYY ZNAARE ZREPUNAQVFR SHEEBJ
GUR JNGREF BS GUR XABJA TYBOR. LBH UNIR OHG RZRETRQ SEBZ CEVZVGVIR
PBAQVGVBAF: JR UNIR N YVGRENGHER, N CEVRFGUBBQ, NA NTRYBAT UVFGBEL NAQ N
CBYVGL.

Avyr.

Puvyq, zna, rssvtl.

Ol gur Avyronax gur onorznevrf xarry, penqyr bs ohyehfurf: n zna
fhccyr va pbzong: fgbarubearq, fgbarorneqrq, urneg bs fgbar.

--LBH CENL GB N YBPNY NAQ BOFPHER VQBY: BHE GRZCYRF, ZNWRFGVP NAQ
ZLFGREVBHF, NER GUR NOBQRF BS VFVF NAQ BFVEVF, BS UBEHF NAQ NZZBA EN.
LBHEF FRESQBZ, NJR NAQ UHZOYRARFF: BHEF GUHAQRE NAQ GUR FRNF. VFENRY VF
JRNX NAQ SRJ NER URE PUVYQERA: RTLCG VF NA UBFG NAQ GREEVOYR NER URE NEZF.
 INTENAGF NAQ QNLYNOBHEREF NER LBH PNYYRQ: GUR JBEYQ GERZOYRF NG BHE ANZR.

N qhzo orypu bs uhatre pyrsg uvf fcrrpu. Ur yvsgrq uvf ibvpr nobir vg
obyqyl:

--OHG, YNQVRF NAQ TRAGYRZRA, UNQ GUR LBHGUSHY ZBFRF YVFGRARQ GB NAQ
NPPRCGRQ GUNG IVRJ BS YVSR, UNQ UR OBJRQ UVF URNQ NAQ OBJRQ UVF JVYY NAQ
OBJRQ UVF FCVEVG ORSBER GUNG NEEBTNAG NQZBAVGVBA UR JBHYQ ARIRE UNIR
OEBHTUG GUR PUBFRA CRBCYR BHG BS GURVE UBHFR BS OBAQNTR, ABE SBYYBJRQ GUR
CVYYNE BS GUR PYBHQ OL QNL. UR JBHYQ ARIRE UNIR FCBXRA JVGU GUR RGREANY
NZVQ YVTUGAVATF BA FVANV'F ZBHAGNVAGBC ABE RIRE UNIR PBZR QBJA JVGU GUR
YVTUG BS VAFCVENGVBA FUVAVAT VA UVF PBHAGRANAPR NAQ ORNEVAT VA UVF NEZF
GUR GNOYRF BS GUR YNJ, TENIRA VA GUR YNATHNTR BS GUR BHGYNJ.

Ur prnfrq naq ybbxrq ng gurz, rawblvat n fvyrapr.


    BZVABHF--SBE UVZ!


W. W. B'Zbyybl fnvq abg jvgubhg erterg:

--Naq lrg ur qvrq jvgubhg univat ragrerq gur ynaq bs cebzvfr.

--N fhqqra--ng--gur--zbzrag--gubhtu--sebz--yvatrevat--vyyarff--
bsgra--cerivbhfyl--rkcrpgbengrq--qrzvfr, Yraruna nqqrq. Naq jvgu n
terng shgher oruvaq uvz.

Gur gebbc bs oner srrg jnf urneq ehfuvat nybat gur unyyjnl naq
cnggrevat hc gur fgnvepnfr.

--Gung vf bengbel, gur cebsrffbe fnvq hapbagenqvpgrq. Tbar jvgu gur jvaq.
Ubfgf ng Zhyyntuznfg naq Gnen bs gur xvatf. Zvyrf bs rnef bs cbepurf.
Gur gevohar'f jbeqf, ubjyrq naq fpnggrerq gb gur sbhe jvaqf. N crbcyr
furygrerq jvguva uvf ibvpr. Qrnq abvfr. Nxnfvp erpbeqf bs nyy gung rire
naljurer jurerire jnf. Ybir naq ynhq uvz: zr ab zber.

V unir zbarl.

--Tragyrzra, Fgrcura fnvq. Nf gur arkg zbgvba ba gur ntraqn cncre znl V
fhttrfg gung gur ubhfr qb abj nqwbhea?

--Lbh gnxr zl oerngu njnl. Vg vf abg crepunapr n Serapu pbzcyvzrag? Ze
B'Znqqra Ohexr nfxrq. 'Gvf gur ubhe, zrguvaxf, jura gur jvarwht,
zrgncubevpnyyl fcrnxvat, vf zbfg tengrshy va Lr napvrag ubfgryel.

--Gung vg or naq urerol vf erfbyhgryl erfbyirq. Nyy gung ner va snibhe
fnl nl, Yraruna naabhaprq. Gur pbagenel ab. V qrpyner vg pneevrq. Gb juvpu
cnegvphyne obbfvat furq? ... Zl pnfgvat ibgr vf: Zbbarl'f!

Ur yrq gur jnl, nqzbavfuvat:

--Jr jvyy fgreayl ershfr gb cnegnxr bs fgebat jngref, jvyy jr abg? Lrf,
jr jvyy abg. Ol ab znaare bs zrnaf.

Ze B'Znqqra Ohexr, sbyybjvat pybfr, fnvq jvgu na nyyl'f yhatr bs uvf
hzoeryyn:

--Ynl ba, Znpqhss!

--Puvc bs gur byq oybpx! gur rqvgbe pevrq, pynccvat Fgrcura ba gur
fubhyqre. Yrg hf tb. Jurer ner gubfr oynfgrq xrlf?

Ur shzoyrq va uvf cbpxrg chyyvat bhg gur pehfurq glcrfurrgf.

--Sbbg naq zbhgu. V xabj. Gung'yy or nyy evtug. Gung'yy tb va. Jurer ner
gurl? Gung'f nyy evtug.

Ur guehfg gur furrgf onpx naq jrag vagb gur vaare bssvpr.


    YRG HF UBCR


W. W. B'Zbyybl, nobhg gb sbyybj uvz va, fnvq dhvrgyl gb Fgrcura:

--V ubcr lbh jvyy yvir gb frr vg choyvfurq. Zlyrf, bar zbzrag.

Ur jrag vagb gur vaare bssvpr, pybfvat gur qbbe oruvaq uvz.

--Pbzr nybat, Fgrcura, gur cebsrffbe fnvq. Gung vf svar, vfa'g vg? Vg unf
gur cebcurgvp ivfvba. SHVG VYVHZ! Gur fnpx bs jvaql Gebl. Xvatqbzf bs guvf
jbeyq. Gur znfgref bs gur Zrqvgreenarna ner sryynurra gbqnl.

Gur svefg arjfobl pnzr cnggrevat qbja gur fgnvef ng gurve urryf naq
ehfurq bhg vagb gur fgerrg, lryyvat:

--Enpvat fcrpvny!

Qhoyva. V unir zhpu, zhpu gb yrnea.

Gurl ghearq gb gur yrsg nybat Noorl fgerrg.

--V unir n ivfvba gbb, Fgrcura fnvq.

--Lrf? gur cebsrffbe fnvq, fxvccvat gb trg vagb fgrc. Penjsbeq jvyy
sbyybj.

Nabgure arjfobl fubg cnfg gurz, lryyvat nf ur ena:

--Enpvat fcrpvny!


    QRNE QVEGL QHOYVA


Qhoyvaref.

--Gjb Qhoyva irfgnyf, Fgrcura fnvq, ryqreyl naq cvbhf, unir yvirq svsgl
naq svsglguerr lrnef va Shzonyyl'f ynar.

--Jurer vf gung? gur cebsrffbe nfxrq.

--Bss Oynpxcvggf, Fgrcura fnvq.

Qnzc avtug errxvat bs uhatel qbhtu. Ntnvafg gur jnyy. Snpr
tyvfgrevat gnyybj haqre ure shfgvna funjy. Senagvp urnegf. Nxnfvp erpbeqf.
Dhvpxre, qneyvag!

Ba abj. Qner vg. Yrg gurer or yvsr.

--Gurl jnag gb frr gur ivrjf bs Qhoyva sebz gur gbc bs Aryfba'f cvyyne.
Gurl fnir hc guerr naq gracrapr va n erq gva yrggreobk zbarlobk. Gurl
funxr bhg gur guerrcraal ovgf naq fvkcraprf naq pbnk bhg gur craavrf jvgu
gur oynqr bs n xavsr. Gjb naq guerr va fvyire naq bar naq frira va
pbccref. Gurl chg ba gurve obaargf naq orfg pybgurf naq gnxr gurve
hzoeryynf sbe srne vg znl pbzr ba gb enva.

--Jvfr ivetvaf, cebsrffbe ZnpUhtu fnvq.


    YVSR BA GUR ENJ


--Gurl ohl bar naq sbhecraprjbegu bs oenja naq sbhe fyvprf bs cnaybns ng
gur abegu pvgl qvavatebbzf va Zneyobebhtu fgerrg sebz Zvff Xngr Pbyyvaf,
cebcevrgerff ... Gurl chepunfr sbhe naq gjragl evcr cyhzf sebz n tvey ng
gur sbbg bs Aryfba'f cvyyne gb gnxr bss gur guvefg bs gur oenja. Gurl tvir
gjb guerrcraal ovgf gb gur tragyrzna ng gur gheafgvyr naq ortva gb jnqqyr
fybjyl hc gur jvaqvat fgnvepnfr, tehagvat, rapbhentvat rnpu bgure, nsenvq
bs gur qnex, cnagvat, bar nfxvat gur bgure unir lbh gur oenja, cenvfvat
Tbq naq gur Oyrffrq Ivetva, guerngravat gb pbzr qbja, crrcvat ng gur
nvefyvgf. Tybel or gb Tbq. Gurl unq ab vqrn vg jnf gung uvtu.

Gurve anzrf ner Naar Xrneaf naq Syberapr ZnpPnor. Naar Xrneaf
unf gur yhzontb sbe juvpu fur ehof ba Ybheqrf jngre, tvira ure ol n ynql
jub tbg n obggyrshy sebz n cnffvbavfg sngure. Syberapr ZnpPnor gnxrf n
pehorra naq n obggyr bs qbhoyr K sbe fhccre rirel Fngheqnl.

--Nagvgurfvf, gur cebsrffbe fnvq abqqvat gjvpr. Irfgny ivetvaf. V pna frr
gurz. Jung'f xrrcvat bhe sevraq?

Ur ghearq.

N oril bs fpnzcrevat arjfoblf ehfurq qbja gur fgrcf, fpnggrevat va
nyy qverpgvbaf, lryyvat, gurve juvgr cncref syhggrevat. Uneq nsgre gurz
Zlyrf Penjsbeq nccrnerq ba gur fgrcf, uvf ung nherbyvat uvf fpneyrg snpr,
gnyxvat jvgu W. W. B'Zbyybl.

--Pbzr nybat, gur cebsrffbe pevrq, jnivat uvf nez.

Ur frg bss ntnva gb jnyx ol Fgrcura'f fvqr.


    ERGHEA BS OYBBZ


--Lrf, ur fnvq. V frr gurz.

Ze Oybbz, oernguyrff, pnhtug va n juvey bs jvyq arjfoblf arne gur
bssvprf bs gur VEVFU PNGUBYVP NAQ QHOYVA CRAAL WBHEANY, pnyyrq:

--Ze Penjsbeq! N zbzrag!

--GRYRTENCU! Enpvat fcrpvny!

--Jung vf vg? Zlyrf Penjsbeq fnvq, snyyvat onpx n cnpr.

N arjfobl pevrq va Ze Oybbz'f snpr:

--Greevoyr gentrql va Enguzvarf! N puvyq ovg ol n oryybjf!



    VAGREIVRJ JVGU GUR RQVGBE


--Whfg guvf nq, Ze Oybbz fnvq, chfuvat guebhtu gbjneqf gur fgrcf,
chssvat, naq gnxvat gur phggvat sebz uvf cbpxrg. V fcbxr jvgu Ze Xrlrf
whfg abj. Ur'yy tvir n erarjny sbe gjb zbaguf, ur fnlf. Nsgre ur'yy frr.
Ohg ur jnagf n cne gb pnyy nggragvba va gur GRYRTENCU gbb, gur Fngheqnl
cvax. Naq ur jnagf vg pbcvrq vs vg'f abg gbb yngr V gbyq pbhapvyybe
Anaarggv sebz gur XVYXRAAL CRBCYR. V pna unir npprff gb vg va gur angvbany
yvoenel. Ubhfr bs xrlf, qba'g lbh frr? Uvf anzr vf Xrlrf. Vg'f n cynl ba
gur anzr. Ohg ur cenpgvpnyyl cebzvfrq ur'q tvir gur erarjny. Ohg ur jnagf
whfg n yvggyr chss. Jung jvyy V gryy uvz, Ze Penjsbeq?



    X.Z.N.


--Jvyy lbh gryy uvz ur pna xvff zl nefr? Zlyrf Penjsbeq fnvq guebjvat bhg
uvf nez sbe rzcunfvf. Gryy uvz gung fgenvtug sebz gur fgnoyr.

N ovg areil. Ybbx bhg sbe fdhnyyf. Nyy bss sbe n qevax. Nez va nez.
Yraruna'f lnpugvat pnc ba gur pnqtr orlbaq. Hfhny oynearl. Jbaqre vf
gung lbhat Qrqnyhf gur zbivat fcvevg. Unf n tbbq cnve bs obbgf ba uvz
gbqnl. Ynfg gvzr V fnj uvz ur unq uvf urryf ba ivrj. Orra jnyxvat va zhpx
fbzrjurer. Pneryrff punc. Jung jnf ur qbvat va Vevfugbja?

--Jryy, Ze Oybbz fnvq, uvf rlrf ergheavat, vs V pna trg gur qrfvta V
fhccbfr vg'f jbegu n fubeg cne. Ur'q tvir gur nq, V guvax. V'yy gryy
uvz ...


    X.Z.E.V.N.


--Ur pna xvff zl eblny Vevfu nefr, Zlyrf Penjsbeq pevrq ybhqyl bire uvf
fubhyqre. Nal gvzr ur yvxrf, gryy uvz.

Juvyr Ze Oybbz fgbbq jrvtuvat gur cbvag naq nobhg gb fzvyr ur fgebqr
ba wrexvyl.


    ENVFVAT GUR JVAQ


--AHYYN OBAN, Wnpx, ur fnvq, envfvat uvf unaq gb uvf puva. V'z hc gb
urer. V'ir orra guebhtu gur ubbc zlfrys. V jnf ybbxvat sbe n sryybj gb
onpx n ovyy sbe zr ab yngre guna ynfg jrrx. Fbeel, Wnpx. Lbh zhfg gnxr gur
jvyy sbe gur qrrq. Jvgu n urneg naq n unys vs V pbhyq envfr gur jvaq
nalubj.

W. W. B'Zbyybl chyyrq n ybat snpr naq jnyxrq ba fvyragyl. Gurl pnhtug
hc ba gur bguref naq jnyxrq noernfg.

--Jura gurl unir rngra gur oenja naq gur oernq naq jvcrq gurve gjragl
svatref va gur cncre gur oernq jnf jenccrq va gurl tb arnere gb gur
envyvatf.

--Fbzrguvat sbe lbh, gur cebsrffbe rkcynvarq gb Zlyrf Penjsbeq. Gjb byq
Qhoyva jbzra ba gur gbc bs Aryfba'f cvyyne.


    FBZR PBYHZA!--
    GUNG'F JUNG JNQQYRE BAR FNVQ


--Gung'f arj, Zlyrf Penjsbeq fnvq. Gung'f pbcl. Bhg sbe gur jnkvrf
Qnetyr. Gjb byq gevpxvrf, jung?

--Ohg gurl ner nsenvq gur cvyyne jvyy snyy, Fgrcura jrag ba. Gurl frr gur
ebbsf naq nethr nobhg jurer gur qvssrerag puhepurf ner: Enguzvarf' oyhr
qbzr, Nqnz naq Rir'f, fnvag Ynherapr B'Gbbyr'f. Ohg vg znxrf gurz tvqql gb
ybbx fb gurl chyy hc gurve fxvegf ...


    GUBFR FYVTUGYL ENZOHAPGVBHF SRZNYRF


--Rnfl nyy, Zlyrf Penjsbeq fnvq. Ab cbrgvp yvprapr. Jr'er va gur
nepuqvbprfr urer.

--Naq frggyr qbja ba gurve fgevcrq crggvpbngf, crrevat hc ng gur fgnghr
bs gur barunaqyrq nqhygrere.

--Barunaqyrq nqhygrere! gur cebsrffbe pevrq. V yvxr gung. V frr gur vqrn.
V frr jung lbh zrna.


    QNZRF QBANGR QHOYVA'F PVGF FCRRQCVYYF
    IRYBPVGBHF NREBYVGUF, ORYVRS


--Vg tvirf gurz n pevpx va gurve arpxf, Fgrcura fnvq, naq gurl ner gbb
gverq gb ybbx hc be qbja be gb fcrnx. Gurl chg gur ont bs cyhzf orgjrra
gurz naq rng gur cyhzf bhg bs vg, bar nsgre nabgure, jvcvat bss jvgu gurve
unaqxrepuvrsf gur cyhzwhvpr gung qevooyrf bhg bs gurve zbhguf naq fcvggvat
gur cyhzfgbarf fybjyl bhg orgjrra gur envyvatf.

Ur tnir n fhqqra ybhq lbhat ynhtu nf n pybfr. Yraruna naq Ze B'Znqqra
Ohexr, urnevat, ghearq, orpxbarq naq yrq ba npebff gbjneqf Zbbarl'f.

--Svavfurq? Zlyrf Penjsbeq fnvq. Fb ybat nf gurl qb ab jbefr.


    FBCUVFG JNYYBCF UNHTUGL URYRA FDHNER BA
    CEBOBFPVF. FCNEGNAF TANFU ZBYNEF. VGUNPNAF
    IBJ CRA VF PUNZC.


--Lbh erzvaq zr bs Nagvfgurarf, gur cebsrffbe fnvq, n qvfpvcyr bs
Tbetvnf, gur fbcuvfg. Vg vf fnvq bs uvz gung abar pbhyq gryy vs ur jrer
ovggrere ntnvafg bguref be ntnvafg uvzfrys. Ur jnf gur fba bs n aboyr naq
n obaqjbzna. Naq ur jebgr n obbx va juvpu ur gbbx njnl gur cnyz bs ornhgl
sebz Netvir Uryra naq unaqrq vg gb cbbe Crarybcr.

Cbbe Crarybcr. Crarybcr Evpu.

Gurl znqr ernql gb pebff B'Pbaaryy fgerrg.


    URYYB GURER, PRAGENY!


Ng inevbhf cbvagf nybat gur rvtug yvarf genzpnef jvgu zbgvbayrff
gebyyrlf fgbbq va gurve genpxf, obhaq sbe be sebz Enguzvarf, Engusneaunz,
Oynpxebpx, Xvatfgbja naq Qnyxrl, Fnaqlzbhag Terra, Evatfraq naq
Fnaqlzbhag Gbjre, Qbaaloebbx, Cnyzrefgba Cnex naq Hccre Enguzvarf,
nyy fgvyy, orpnyzrq va fubeg pvephvg. Unpxarl pnef, pnof, qryvirel
jnttbaf, znvyinaf, cevingr oebhtunzf, nrengrq zvareny jngre sybngf jvgu
enggyvat pengrf bs obggyrf, enggyrq, ebyyrq, ubefrqenja, encvqyl.



    JUNG?--NAQ YVXRJVFR--JURER?


--Ohg jung qb lbh pnyy vg? Zlyrf Penjsbeq nfxrq. Jurer qvq gurl trg gur
cyhzf?


    IVETVYVNA, FNLF CRQNTBTHR.
    FBCUBZBER CYHZCF SBE BYQ ZNA ZBFRF.


--Pnyy vg, jnvg, gur cebsrffbe fnvq, bcravat uvf ybat yvcf jvqr gb
ersyrpg. Pnyy vg, yrg zr frr. Pnyy vg: QRHF ABOVF UNRP BGVN SRPVG.

--Ab, Fgrcura fnvq. V pnyy vg N CVFTNU FVTUG BS CNYRFGVAR BE GUR CNENOYR
BS GUR CYHZF.

--V frr, gur cebsrffbe fnvq.

Ur ynhturq evpuyl.

--V frr, ur fnvq ntnva jvgu arj cyrnfher. Zbfrf naq gur cebzvfrq ynaq. Jr
tnir uvz gung vqrn, ur nqqrq gb W. W. B'Zbyybl.


    UBENGVB VF PLABFHER GUVF SNVE WHAR QNL


W. W. B'Zbyybl frag n jrnel fvqrybat tynapr gbjneqf gur fgnghr naq
uryq uvf crnpr.

--V frr, gur cebsrffbe fnvq.

Ur unygrq ba fve Wbua Tenl'f cnirzrag vfynaq naq crrerq nybsg ng Aryfba
guebhtu gur zrfurf bs uvf jel fzvyr.


    QVZVAVFURQ QVTVGF CEBIR GBB GVGVYYNGVAT
    SBE SEVFXL SEHZCF. NAAR JVZOYRF, SYB
    JNATYRF--LRG PNA LBH OYNZR GURZ?


--Barunaqyrq nqhygrere, ur fnvq fzvyvat tevzyl. Gung gvpxyrf zr, V zhfg
fnl.

--Gvpxyrq gur byq barf gbb, Zlyrf Penjsbeq fnvq, vs gur Tbq Nyzvtugl'f
gehgu jnf xabja.


    * * * * * * *


Cvarnccyr ebpx, yrzba cyngg, ohggre fpbgpu. N fhtnefgvpxl tvey
fubiryyvat fpbbcshyf bs pernzf sbe n puevfgvna oebgure. Fbzr fpubby gerng.
Onq sbe gurve ghzzvrf. Ybmratr naq pbzsvg znahsnpghere gb Uvf Znwrfgl
gur Xvat. Tbq. Fnir. Bhe. Fvggvat ba uvf guebar fhpxvat erq whwhorf juvgr.

N fbzoer L.Z.P.N. lbhat zna, jngpushy nzbat gur jnez fjrrg
shzrf bs Tenunz Yrzba'f, cynprq n guebjnjnl va n unaq bs Ze Oybbz.

Urneg gb urneg gnyxf.

Oybb ... Zr? Ab.

Oybbq bs gur Ynzo.

Uvf fybj srrg jnyxrq uvz evirejneq, ernqvat. Ner lbh fnirq? Nyy ner
jnfurq va gur oybbq bs gur ynzo. Tbq jnagf oybbq ivpgvz. Ovegu, ulzra,
znegle, jne, sbhaqngvba bs n ohvyqvat, fnpevsvpr, xvqarl oheagbssrevat,
qehvqf' nygnef. Ryvwnu vf pbzvat. Qe Wbua Nyrknaqre Qbjvr erfgbere bs gur
puhepu va Mvba vf pbzvat.


    VF PBZVAT! VF PBZVAT!! VF PBZVAT!!!
    NYY URNEGVYL JRYPBZR.


Cnlvat tnzr. Gbeel naq Nyrknaqre ynfg lrne. Cbyltnzl. Uvf jvsr jvyy
chg gur fgbccre ba gung. Jurer jnf gung nq fbzr Ovezvatunz svez gur
yhzvabhf pehpvsvk. Bhe Fnivbhe. Jnxr hc va gur qrnq bs avtug naq frr uvz
ba gur jnyy, unatvat. Crccre'f tubfg vqrn. Veba anvyf ena va.

Cubfcubehf vg zhfg or qbar jvgu. Vs lbh yrnir n ovg bs pbqsvfu sbe
vafgnapr. V pbhyq frr gur oyhrl fvyire bire vg. Avtug V jrag qbja gb gur
cnagel va gur xvgpura. Qba'g yvxr nyy gur fzryyf va vg jnvgvat gb ehfu
bhg. Jung jnf vg fur jnagrq? Gur Znyntn envfvaf. Guvaxvat bs Fcnva. Orsber
Ehql jnf obea. Gur cubfcuberfprapr, gung oyhrl terral. Irel tbbq sbe gur
oenva.

Sebz Ohgyre'f zbahzrag ubhfr pbeare ur tynaprq nybat Onpurybe'f
jnyx. Qrqnyhf' qnhtugre gurer fgvyy bhgfvqr Qvyyba'f nhpgvbaebbzf. Zhfg or
fryyvat bss fbzr byq sheavgher. Xarj ure rlrf ng bapr sebz gur sngure.
Yboovat nobhg jnvgvat sbe uvz. Ubzr nyjnlf oernxf hc jura gur zbgure
tbrf. Svsgrra puvyqera ur unq. Ovegu rirel lrne nyzbfg. Gung'f va gurve
gurbybtl be gur cevrfg jba'g tvir gur cbbe jbzna gur pbasrffvba, gur
nofbyhgvba. Vapernfr naq zhygvcyl. Qvq lbh rire urne fhpu na vqrn? Rng lbh
bhg bs ubhfr naq ubzr. Ab snzvyvrf gurzfryirf gb srrq. Yvivat ba gur sng
bs gur ynaq. Gurve ohggrevrf naq yneqref. V'q yvxr gb frr gurz qb gur
oynpx snfg Lbz Xvcche. Pebffohaf. Bar zrny naq n pbyyngvba sbe srne ur'q
pbyyncfr ba gur nygne. N ubhfrxrrcre bs bar bs gubfr sryybjf vs lbh pbhyq
cvpx vg bhg bs ure. Arire cvpx vg bhg bs ure. Yvxr trggvat y.f.q. bhg bs
uvz. Qbrf uvzfrys jryy. Ab thrfgf. Nyy sbe ahzore bar. Jngpuvat uvf jngre.
Oevat lbhe bja oernq naq ohggre. Uvf erirerapr: zhz'f gur jbeq.

Tbbq Ybeq, gung cbbe puvyq'f qerff vf va syvggref. Haqresrq fur ybbxf
gbb. Cbgngbrf naq znetr, znetr naq cbgngbrf. Vg'f nsgre gurl srry vg.
Cebbs bs gur chqqvat. Haqrezvarf gur pbafgvghgvba.

Nf ur frg sbbg ba B'Pbaaryy oevqtr n chssonyy bs fzbxr cyhzrq hc
sebz gur cnencrg. Oerjrel onetr jvgu rkcbeg fgbhg. Ratynaq. Frn nve fbhef
vg, V urneq. Or vagrerfgvat fbzr qnl trg n cnff guebhtu Unapbpx gb frr gur
oerjrel. Erthyne jbeyq va vgfrys. Ingf bs cbegre jbaqreshy. Engf trg va
gbb. Qevax gurzfryirf oybngrq nf ovt nf n pbyyvr sybngvat. Qrnq qehax ba
gur cbegre. Qevax gvyy gurl chxr ntnva yvxr puevfgvnaf. Vzntvar qevaxvat
gung! Engf: ingf. Jryy, bs pbhefr, vs jr xarj nyy gur guvatf.

Ybbxvat qbja ur fnj synccvat fgebatyl, jurryvat orgjrra gur tnhag
dhnljnyyf, thyyf. Ebhtu jrngure bhgfvqr. Vs V guerj zlfrys qbja?
Erhora W'f fba zhfg unir fjnyybjrq n tbbq oryylshy bs gung frjntr. Bar naq
rvtugcrapr gbb zhpu. Uuuuz. Vg'f gur qebyy jnl ur pbzrf bhg jvgu gur
guvatf. Xabjf ubj gb gryy n fgbel gbb.

Gurl jurryrq ybjre. Ybbxvat sbe teho. Jnvg.

Ur guerj qbja nzbat gurz n pehzcyrq cncre onyy. Ryvwnu guveglgjb
srrg cre frp vf pbz. Abg n ovg. Gur onyy oboorq haurrqrq ba gur jnxr bs
fjryyf, sybngrq haqre ol gur oevqtrcvref. Abg fhpu qnza sbbyf. Nyfb gur
qnl V guerj gung fgnyr pnxr bhg bs gur Reva'f Xvat cvpxrq vg hc va gur
jnxr svsgl lneqf nfgrea. Yvir ol gurve jvgf. Gurl jurryrq, synccvat.

    GUR UHATEL SNZVFURQ THYY
    SYNCF B'RE GUR JNGREF QHYY.


Gung vf ubj cbrgf jevgr, gur fvzvyne fbhaqf. Ohg gura Funxrfcrner unf
ab eulzrf: oynax irefr. Gur sybj bs gur ynathntr vg vf. Gur gubhtugf.
Fbyrza.


    UNZYRG, V NZ GUL SNGURE'F FCVEVG
    QBBZRQ SBE N PREGNVA GVZR GB JNYX GUR RNEGU.


--Gjb nccyrf n craal! Gjb sbe n craal!

Uvf tnmr cnffrq bire gur tynmrq nccyrf freevrq ba ure fgnaq.
Nhfgenyvnaf gurl zhfg or guvf gvzr bs lrne. Fuval crryf: cbyvfurf gurz hc
jvgu n ent be n unaqxrepuvrs.

Jnvg. Gubfr cbbe oveqf.

Ur unygrq ntnva naq obhtug sebz gur byq nccyrjbzna gjb Onaohel
pnxrf sbe n craal naq oebxr gur oevggyr cnfgr naq guerj vgf sentzragf qbja
vagb gur Yvssrl. Frr gung? Gur thyyf fjbbcrq fvyragyl, gjb, gura nyy sebz
gurve urvtugf, cbhapvat ba cerl. Tbar. Rirel zbefry.

Njner bs gurve terrq naq phaavat ur fubbx gur cbjqrel pehzo sebz uvf
unaqf. Gurl arire rkcrpgrq gung. Znaan. Yvir ba svfu, svful syrfu
gurl unir, nyy frnoveqf, thyyf, frntbbfr. Fjnaf sebz Naan Yvssrl fjvz
qbja urer fbzrgvzrf gb cerra gurzfryirf. Ab nppbhagvat sbe gnfgrf.
Jbaqre jung xvaq vf fjnazrng. Ebovafba Pehfbr unq gb yvir ba gurz.

Gurl jurryrq synccvat jrnxyl. V'z abg tbvat gb guebj nal zber.
Craal dhvgr rabhtu. Ybg bs gunaxf V trg. Abg rira n pnj. Gurl fcernq sbbg
naq zbhgu qvfrnfr gbb. Vs lbh penz n ghexrl fnl ba purfgahgzrny vg gnfgrf
yvxr gung. Rng cvt yvxr cvt. Ohg gura jul vf vg gung fnygjngre svfu ner
abg fnygl? Ubj vf gung?

Uvf rlrf fbhtug nafjre sebz gur evire naq fnj n ebjobng ebpx ng napube
ba gur gernpyl fjryyf ynmvyl vgf cynfgrerq obneq.

XVAB'F
11/-
GEBHFREF

Tbbq vqrn gung. Jbaqre vs ur cnlf erag gb gur pbecbengvba. Ubj pna
lbh bja jngre ernyyl? Vg'f nyjnlf sybjvat va n fgernz, arire gur fnzr,
juvpu va gur fgernz bs yvsr jr genpr. Orpnhfr yvsr vf n fgernz. Nyy xvaqf
bs cynprf ner tbbq sbe nqf. Gung dhnpx qbpgbe sbe gur pync hfrq gb or
fghpx hc va nyy gur terraubhfrf. Arire frr vg abj. Fgevpgyl pbasvqragvny.
Qe Ul Senaxf. Qvqa'g pbfg uvz n erq yvxr Zntvaav gur qnapvat znfgre frys
nqiregvfrzrag. Tbg sryybjf gb fgvpx gurz hc be fgvpx gurz hc uvzfrys sbe
gung znggre ba gur d. g. ehaavat va gb ybbfra n ohggba. Sylolavtug. Whfg
gur cynpr gbb. CBFG AB OVYYF. CBFG 110 CVYYF. Fbzr punc jvgu n qbfr
oheavat uvz.

Vs ur ...?

B!

Ru?

Ab ... Ab.

Ab, ab. V qba'g oryvrir vg. Ur jbhyqa'g fheryl?

Ab, ab.

Ze Oybbz zbirq sbejneq, envfvat uvf gebhoyrq rlrf. Guvax ab zber nobhg
gung. Nsgre bar. Gvzronyy ba gur onyynfgbssvpr vf qbja. Qhafvax gvzr.
Snfpvangvat yvggyr obbx gung vf bs fve Eboreg Onyy'f. Cnenyynk. V arire
rknpgyl haqrefgbbq. Gurer'f n cevrfg. Pbhyq nfx uvz. Cne vg'f Terrx:
cnenyyry, cnenyynk. Zrg uvz cvxr ubfrf fur pnyyrq vg gvyy V gbyq ure nobhg
gur genafzvtengvba. B ebpxf!

Ze Oybbz fzvyrq B ebpxf ng gjb jvaqbjf bs gur onyynfgbssvpr. Fur'f
evtug nsgre nyy. Bayl ovt jbeqf sbe beqvanel guvatf ba nppbhag bs gur
fbhaq. Fur'f abg rknpgyl jvggl. Pna or ehqr gbb. Oyheg bhg jung V jnf
guvaxvat. Fgvyy, V qba'g xabj. Fur hfrq gb fnl Ora Qbyyneq unq n onfr
oneerygbar ibvpr. Ur unf yrtf yvxr oneeryf naq lbh'q guvax ur jnf fvatvat
vagb n oneery. Abj, vfa'g gung jvg. Gurl hfrq gb pnyy uvz ovt Ora. Abg
unys nf jvggl nf pnyyvat uvz onfr oneerygbar. Nccrgvgr yvxr na nyongebff.
Trg bhgfvqr bs n oneba bs orrs. Cbjreshy zna ur jnf ng fgbjvat njnl ahzore
bar Onff. Oneery bs Onff. Frr? Vg nyy jbexf bhg.


 N cebprffvba bs juvgrfzbpxrq fnaqjvpuzra znepurq fybjyl gbjneqf
uvz nybat gur thggre, fpneyrg fnfurf npebff gurve obneqf. Onetnvaf. Yvxr
gung cevrfg gurl ner guvf zbeavat: jr unir fvaarq: jr unir fhssrerq. Ur
ernq gur fpneyrg yrggref ba gurve svir gnyy juvgr ungf: U. R. Y. L. F.
Jvfqbz Uryl'f. L ynttvat oruvaq qerj n puhax bs oernq sebz haqre uvf
sberobneq, penzzrq vg vagb uvf zbhgu naq zhapurq nf ur jnyxrq. Bhe fgncyr
sbbq. Guerr obo n qnl, jnyxvat nybat gur thggref, fgerrg nsgre fgerrg.
Whfg xrrc fxva naq obar gbtrgure, oernq naq fxvyyl. Gurl ner abg Obly:
ab, Z Tynqr'f zra. Qbrfa'g oevat va nal ohfvarff rvgure. V fhttrfgrq
gb uvz nobhg n genafcnerag fubjpneg jvgu gjb fzneg tveyf fvggvat
vafvqr jevgvat yrggref, pbclobbxf, rairybcrf, oybggvatcncre. V org gung
jbhyq unir pnhtug ba. Fzneg tveyf jevgvat fbzrguvat pngpu gur rlr ng bapr.
Rirelbar qlvat gb xabj jung fur'f jevgvat. Trg gjragl bs gurz ebhaq lbh
vs lbh fgner ng abguvat. Unir n svatre va gur cvr. Jbzra gbb. Phevbfvgl.
Cvyyne bs fnyg. Jbhyqa'g unir vg bs pbhefr orpnhfr ur qvqa'g guvax
bs vg uvzfrys svefg. Be gur vaxobggyr V fhttrfgrq jvgu n snyfr fgnva
bs oynpx pryyhybvq. Uvf vqrnf sbe nqf yvxr Cyhzgerr'f cbggrq haqre
gur bovghnevrf, pbyq zrng qrcnegzrag. Lbh pna'g yvpx 'rz. Jung? Bhe
rairybcrf. Uryyb, Wbarf, jurer ner lbh tbvat? Pna'g fgbc, Ebovafba,
V nz unfgravat gb chepunfr gur bayl eryvnoyr vaxrenfre XNAFRYY,
fbyq ol Uryl'f Ygq, 85 Qnzr fgerrg. Jryy bhg bs gung ehpx V nz.
Qrivy bs n wbo vg jnf pbyyrpgvat nppbhagf bs gubfr pbairagf. Genadhvyyn
pbairag. Gung jnf n avpr aha gurer, ernyyl fjrrg snpr. Jvzcyr fhvgrq ure
fznyy urnq. Fvfgre? Fvfgre? V nz fher fur jnf pebffrq va ybir ol ure rlrf.
Irel uneq gb onetnva jvgu gung fbeg bs n jbzna. V qvfgheorq ure ng ure
qribgvbaf gung zbeavat. Ohg tynq gb pbzzhavpngr jvgu gur bhgfvqr jbeyq.
Bhe terng qnl, fur fnvq. Srnfg bs Bhe Ynql bs Zbhag Pnezry. Fjrrg anzr
gbb: pnenzry. Fur xarj V, V guvax fur xarj ol gur jnl fur. Vs fur unq
zneevrq fur jbhyq unir punatrq. V fhccbfr gurl ernyyl jrer fubeg bs
zbarl. Sevrq rirelguvat va gur orfg ohggre nyy gur fnzr. Ab yneq sbe gurz.
Zl urneg'f oebxr rngvat qevccvat. Gurl yvxr ohggrevat gurzfryirf va naq
bhg. Zbyyl gnfgvat vg, ure irvy hc. Fvfgre? Cng Pynssrl, gur cnjaoebxre'f
qnhtugre. Vg jnf n aha gurl fnl vairagrq oneorq jver.

Ur pebffrq Jrfgzberynaq fgerrg jura ncbfgebcur F unq cybqqrq ol.
Ebire plpyrfubc. Gubfr enprf ner ba gbqnl. Ubj ybat ntb vf gung? Lrne
Cuvy Tvyyvtna qvrq. Jr jrer va Ybzoneq fgerrg jrfg. Jnvg: jnf va Gubz'f.
Tbg gur wbo va Jvfqbz Uryl'f lrne jr zneevrq. Fvk lrnef. Gra lrnef ntb:
avarglsbhe ur qvrq lrf gung'f evtug gur ovt sver ng Neabgg'f. Iny Qvyyba
jnf ybeq znlbe. Gur Tyraperr qvaare. Nyqrezna Eboreg B'Ervyyl rzcglvat gur
cbeg vagb uvf fbhc orsber gur synt sryy. Oboobo ynccvat vg sbe gur vaare
nyqrezna. Pbhyqa'g urne jung gur onaq cynlrq. Sbe jung jr unir nyernql
erprvirq znl gur Ybeq znxr hf. Zvyyl jnf n xvqql gura. Zbyyl unq gung
ryrcunagterl qerff jvgu gur oenvqrq sebtf. Znagnvyberq jvgu fryspbirerq
ohggbaf. Fur qvqa'g yvxr vg orpnhfr V fcenvarq zl naxyr svefg qnl fur jber
pubve cvpavp ng gur Fhtneybns. Nf vs gung. Byq Tbbqjva'f gnyy ung qbar hc
jvgu fbzr fgvpxl fghss. Syvrf' cvpavp gbb. Arire chg n qerff ba ure onpx
yvxr vg. Svggrq ure yvxr n tybir, fubhyqref naq uvcf. Whfg ortvaavat gb
cyhzc vg bhg jryy. Enoovgcvr jr unq gung qnl. Crbcyr ybbxvat nsgre ure.

Unccl. Unccvre gura. Faht yvggyr ebbz gung jnf jvgu gur erq
jnyycncre. Qbpxeryy'f, bar naq avarcrapr n qbmra. Zvyyl'f ghoovat avtug.
Nzrevpna fbnc V obhtug: ryqresybjre. Pbfl fzryy bs ure ongujngre. Shaal
fur ybbxrq fbncrq nyy bire. Funcryl gbb. Abj cubgbtencul. Cbbe cncn'f
qnthreerbglcr ngryvre ur gbyq zr bs. Urerqvgnel gnfgr.

Ur jnyxrq nybat gur pheofgbar.

Fgernz bs yvsr. Jung jnf gur anzr bs gung cevrfglybbxvat punc jnf
nyjnlf fdhvagvat va jura ur cnffrq? Jrnx rlrf, jbzna. Fgbccrq va
Pvgeba'f fnvag Xriva'f cnenqr. Cra fbzrguvat. Craqraavf? Zl zrzbel vf
trggvat. Cra ...? Bs pbhefr vg'f lrnef ntb. Abvfr bs gur genzf cebonoyl.
Jryy, vs ur pbhyqa'g erzrzore gur qnlsngure'f anzr gung ur frrf rirel qnl.

Onegryy q'Nepl jnf gur grabe, whfg pbzvat bhg gura. Frrvat ure ubzr
nsgre cenpgvpr. Pbaprvgrq sryybj jvgu uvf jnkrqhc zbhfgnpur. Tnir ure gung
fbat JVAQF GUNG OYBJ SEBZ GUR FBHGU.

Jvaql avtug gung jnf V jrag gb srgpu ure gurer jnf gung ybqtr zrrgvat
ba nobhg gubfr ybggrel gvpxrgf nsgre Tbbqjva'f pbapreg va gur fhccreebbz
be bnxebbz bs gur Znafvba ubhfr. Ur naq V oruvaq. Furrg bs ure zhfvp oyrj
bhg bs zl unaq ntnvafg gur Uvtu fpubby envyvatf. Yhpxl vg qvqa'g. Guvat
yvxr gung fcbvyf gur rssrpg bs n avtug sbe ure. Cebsrffbe Tbbqjva yvaxvat
ure va sebag. Funxl ba uvf cvaf, cbbe byq fbg. Uvf snerjryy pbapregf.
Cbfvgviryl ynfg nccrnenapr ba nal fgntr. Znl or sbe zbaguf naq znl or sbe
arire. Erzrzore ure ynhtuvat ng gur jvaq, ure oyvmmneq pbyyne hc. Pbeare
bs Unepbheg ebnq erzrzore gung thfg. Oeesbb! Oyrj hc nyy ure fxvegf naq
ure obn arneyl fzbgurerq byq Tbbqjva. Fur qvq trg syhfurq va gur jvaq.
Erzrzore jura jr tbg ubzr enxvat hc gur sver naq selvat hc gubfr cvrprf
bs ync bs zhggba sbe ure fhccre jvgu gur Puhgarl fnhpr fur yvxrq. Naq gur
zhyyrq ehz. Pbhyq frr ure va gur orqebbz sebz gur urnegu hapynzcvat gur
ohfx bs ure fgnlf: juvgr.

Fjvfu naq fbsg sybc ure fgnlf znqr ba gur orq. Nyjnlf jnez sebz
ure. Nyjnlf yvxrq gb yrg ure frys bhg. Fvggvat gurer nsgre gvyy arne gjb
gnxvat bhg ure unvecvaf. Zvyyl ghpxrq hc va orqqlubhfr. Unccl. Unccl.
Gung jnf gur avtug ...

--B, Ze Oybbz, ubj qb lbh qb?

--B, ubj qb lbh qb, Zef Oerra?

--Ab hfr pbzcynvavat. Ubj vf Zbyyl gubfr gvzrf? Unira'g frra ure sbe ntrf.

--Va gur cvax, Ze Oybbz fnvq tnvyl. Zvyyl unf n cbfvgvba qbja va
Zhyyvatne, lbh xabj.

--Tb njnl! Vfa'g gung tenaq sbe ure?

--Lrf. Va n cubgbtencure'f gurer. Trggvat ba yvxr n ubhfr ba sver. Ubj ner
nyy lbhe punetrf?

--Nyy ba gur onxre'f yvfg, Zef Oerra fnvq.

Ubj znal unf fur? Ab bgure va fvtug.

--Lbh'er va oynpx, V frr. Lbh unir ab ...

--Ab, Ze Oybbz fnvq. V unir whfg pbzr sebz n shareny.

Tbvat gb pebc hc nyy qnl, V sberfrr. Jub'f qrnq, jura naq jung qvq
ur qvr bs? Ghea hc yvxr n onq craal.

--B, qrne zr, Zef Oerra fnvq. V ubcr vg jnfa'g nal arne eryngvba.

Znl nf jryy trg ure flzcngul.

--Qvtanz, Ze Oybbz fnvq. Na byq sevraq bs zvar. Ur qvrq dhvgr fhqqrayl,
cbbe sryybj. Urneg gebhoyr, V oryvrir. Shareny jnf guvf zbeavat.


    LBHE SHARENY'F GBZBEEBJ
    JUVYR LBH'ER PBZVAT GUEBHTU GUR ELR.
    QVQQYRQVQQYR QHZQHZ
    QVQQYRQVQQYR ...


--Fnq gb ybfr gur byq sevraqf, Zef Oerra'f jbznarlrf fnvq zrynapubyvyl.

Abj gung'f dhvgr rabhtu nobhg gung. Whfg: dhvrgyl: uhfonaq.

--Naq lbhe ybeq naq znfgre?

Zef Oerra ghearq hc ure gjb ynetr rlrf. Unfa'g ybfg gurz nalubj.

--B, qba'g or gnyxvat! fur fnvq. Ur'f n pnhgvba gb enggyrfanxrf. Ur'f va
gurer abj jvgu uvf ynjobbxf svaqvat bhg gur ynj bs yvory. Ur unf zr
urnegfpnyqrq. Jnvg gvyy V fubj lbh.

Ubg zbpxghegyr incbhe naq fgrnz bs arjonxrq wnzchssf ebylcbyl
cbherq bhg sebz Uneevfba'f. Gur urnil abbaerrx gvpxyrq gur gbc bs Ze
Oybbz'f thyyrg. Jnag gb znxr tbbq cnfgel, ohggre, orfg sybhe, Qrzrenen
fhtne, be gurl'q gnfgr vg jvgu gur ubg grn. Be vf vg sebz ure? N onersbbg
neno fgbbq bire gur tengvat, oernguvat va gur shzrf. Qrnqra gur tanj bs
uhatre gung jnl. Cyrnfher be cnva vf vg? Craal qvaare. Xavsr naq sbex
punvarq gb gur gnoyr.

Bcravat ure unaqont, puvccrq yrngure. Ungcva: bhtug gb unir n
thneq ba gubfr guvatf. Fgvpx vg va n punc'f rlr va gur genz. Ehzzntvat.
Bcra. Zbarl. Cyrnfr gnxr bar. Qrivyf vs gurl ybfr fvkcrapr. Envfr Pnva.
Uhfonaq onetvat. Jurer'f gur gra fuvyyvatf V tnir lbh ba Zbaqnl? Ner
lbh srrqvat lbhe yvggyr oebgure'f snzvyl? Fbvyrq unaqxrepuvrs:
zrqvpvarobggyr. Cnfgvyyr gung jnf sryy. Jung vf fur? ...

--Gurer zhfg or n arj zbba bhg, fur fnvq. Ur'f nyjnlf onq gura. Qb lbh
xabj jung ur qvq ynfg avtug?

Ure unaq prnfrq gb ehzzntr. Ure rlrf svkrq gurzfryirf ba uvz, jvqr
va nynez, lrg fzvyvat.

--Jung? Ze Oybbz nfxrq.

Yrg ure fcrnx. Ybbx fgenvtug va ure rlrf. V oryvrir lbh. Gehfg zr.

--Jbxr zr hc va gur avtug, fur fnvq. Qernz ur unq, n avtugzner.

Vaqvtrf.

--Fnvq gur npr bs fcnqrf jnf jnyxvat hc gur fgnvef.

--Gur npr bs fcnqrf! Ze Oybbz fnvq.

Fur gbbx n sbyqrq cbfgpneq sebz ure unaqont.

--Ernq gung, fur fnvq. Ur tbg vg guvf zbeavat.

--Jung vf vg? Ze Oybbz nfxrq, gnxvat gur pneq. H.C.?

--H.C.: hc, fur fnvq. Fbzrbar gnxvat n evfr bhg bs uvz. Vg'f n terng funzr
sbe gurz jubrire ur vf.

--Vaqrrq vg vf, Ze Oybbz fnvq.

Fur gbbx onpx gur pneq, fvtuvat.

--Naq abj ur'f tbvat ebhaq gb Ze Zragba'f bssvpr. Ur'f tbvat gb gnxr na
npgvba sbe gra gubhfnaq cbhaqf, ur fnlf.

Fur sbyqrq gur pneq vagb ure hagvql ont naq fanccrq gur pngpu.

Fnzr oyhr fretr qerff fur unq gjb lrnef ntb, gur anc oyrnpuvat. Frra
vgf orfg qnlf. Jvfcvfu unve bire ure rnef. Naq gung qbjql gbdhr: guerr byq
tencrf gb gnxr gur unez bhg bs vg. Funool tragrry. Fur hfrq gb or n gnfgl
qerffre. Yvarf ebhaq ure zbhgu. Bayl n lrne be fb byqre guna Zbyyl.

Frr gur rlr gung jbzna tnir ure, cnffvat. Pehry. Gur hasnve frk.

Ur ybbxrq fgvyy ng ure, ubyqvat onpx oruvaq uvf ybbx uvf qvfpbagrag.
Chatrag zbpxghegyr bkgnvy zhyyvtngnjal. V'z uhatel gbb. Synxrf bs cnfgel
ba gur thffrg bs ure qerff: qnho bs fhtnel sybhe fghpx gb ure purrx.
Euhoneo gneg jvgu yvoreny svyyvatf, evpu sehvg vagrevbe. Wbfvr Cbjryy gung
jnf. Va Yhxr Qblyr'f ybat ntb. Qbycuva'f Onea, gur punenqrf. H.C.: hc.

Punatr gur fhowrpg.

--Qb lbh rire frr nalguvat bs Zef Ornhsbl? Ze Oybbz nfxrq.

--Zvan Chersbl? fur fnvq.

Cuvyvc Ornhsbl V jnf guvaxvat. Cynltbref' Pyho. Zngpunz bsgra
guvaxf bs gur znfgrefgebxr. Qvq V chyy gur punva? Lrf. Gur ynfg npg.

--Lrf.

--V whfg pnyyrq gb nfx ba gur jnl va vf fur bire vg. Fur'f va gur ylvat-va
ubfcvgny va Ubyyrf fgerrg. Qe Ubear tbg ure va. Fur'f guerr qnlf onq abj.

--B, Ze Oybbz fnvq. V'z fbeel gb urne gung.

--Lrf, Zef Oerra fnvq. Naq n ubhfrshy bs xvqf ng ubzr. Vg'f n irel fgvss
ovegu, gur ahefr gbyq zr.

---B, Ze Oybbz fnvq.

Uvf urnil cvglvat tnmr nofbeorq ure arjf. Uvf gbathr pynpxrq va
pbzcnffvba. Qgu! Qgu!

--V'z fbeel gb urne gung, ur fnvq. Cbbe guvat! Guerr qnlf! Gung'f greevoyr
sbe ure.

Zef Oerra abqqrq.

--Fur jnf gnxra onq ba gur Ghrfqnl ...

Ze Oybbz gbhpurq ure shaalobar tragyl, jneavat ure:

--Zvaq! Yrg guvf zna cnff.

N obal sbez fgebqr nybat gur pheofgbar sebz gur evire fgnevat jvgu n
encg tnmr vagb gur fhayvtug guebhtu n urnilfgevatrq tynff. Gvtug nf n
fxhyycvrpr n gval ung tevccrq uvf urnq. Sebz uvf nez n sbyqrq qhfgpbng, n
fgvpx naq na hzoeryyn qnatyrq gb uvf fgevqr.

--Jngpu uvz, Ze Oybbz fnvq. Ur nyjnlf jnyxf bhgfvqr gur ynzccbfgf. Jngpu!

--Jub vf ur vs vg'f n snve dhrfgvba? Zef Oerra nfxrq. Vf ur qbggl?

--Uvf anzr vf Pnfury Oblyr B'Pbaabe Svgmznhevpr Gvfqnyy Sneeryy, Ze
Oybbz fnvq fzvyvat. Jngpu!

--Ur unf rabhtu bs gurz, fur fnvq. Qravf jvyy or yvxr gung bar bs gurfr
qnlf.

Fur oebxr bss fhqqrayl.

--Gurer ur vf, fur fnvq. V zhfg tb nsgre uvz. Tbbqolr. Erzrzore zr gb
Zbyyl, jba'g lbh?

--V jvyy, Ze Oybbz fnvq.

Ur jngpurq ure qbqtr guebhtu cnffref gbjneqf gur fubcsebagf. Qravf
Oerra va fxvzcl sebpxpbng naq oyhr pnainf fubrf fuhssyrq bhg bs Uneevfba'f
uhttvat gjb urnil gbzrf gb uvf evof. Oybja va sebz gur onl. Yvxr byq
gvzrf. Ur fhssrerq ure gb biregnxr uvz jvgubhg fhecevfr naq guehfg uvf
qhyy terl orneq gbjneqf ure, uvf ybbfr wnj jnttvat nf ur fcbxr rnearfgyl.

Zrfuhttnu. Bss uvf puhzc.

Ze Oybbz jnyxrq ba ntnva rnfvyl, frrvat nurnq bs uvz va fhayvtug gur
gvtug fxhyycvrpr, gur qnatyvat fgvpxhzoeryynqhfgpbng. Tbvat gur gjb qnlf.
Jngpu uvz!  Bhg ur tbrf ntnva. Bar jnl bs trggvat ba va gur jbeyq. Naq
gung bgure byq zbfrl yhangvp va gubfr qhqf. Uneq gvzr fur zhfg unir jvgu
uvz.

H.C.: hc. V'yy gnxr zl bngu gung'f Nys Oretna be Evpuvr Tbhyqvat.
Jebgr vg sbe n ynex va gur Fpbgpu ubhfr V org nalguvat. Ebhaq gb Zragba'f
bssvpr. Uvf blfgre rlrf fgnevat ng gur cbfgpneq. Or n srnfg sbe gur tbqf.

Ur cnffrq gur VEVFU GVZRF. Gurer zvtug or bgure nafjref Vlvat gurer.
Yvxr gb nafjre gurz nyy. Tbbq flfgrz sbe pevzvanyf. Pbqr. Ng gurve yhapu
abj. Pyrex jvgu gur tynffrf gurer qbrfa'g xabj zr. B, yrnir gurz gurer gb
fvzzre. Rabhtu obgure jnqvat guebhtu sbeglsbhe bs gurz. Jnagrq, fzneg
ynql glcvfg gb nvq tragyrzna va yvgrenel jbex. V pnyyrq lbh anhtugl
qneyvat orpnhfr V qb abg yvxr gung bgure jbeyq. Cyrnfr gryy zr jung vf gur
zrnavat. Cyrnfr gryy zr jung creshzr qbrf lbhe jvsr. Gryy zr jub znqr gur
jbeyq. Gur jnl gurl fcevat gubfr dhrfgvbaf ba lbh. Naq gur bgure bar
Yvmmvr Gjvtt. Zl yvgrenel rssbegf unir unq gur tbbq sbeghar gb zrrg jvgu
gur nccebiny bs gur rzvarag cbrg N. R. (Ze Trb. Ehffryy). Ab gvzr gb qb
ure unve qevaxvat fybccl grn jvgu n obbx bs cbrgel.

Orfg cncre ol ybat punyxf sbe n fznyy nq. Tbg gur cebivaprf abj.
Pbbx naq trareny, rkp. phvfvar, ubhfrznvq xrcg. Jnagrq yvir zna sbe fcvevg
pbhagre. Erfc. tvey (E.P.) jvfurf gb urne bs cbfg va sehvg be cbex fubc.
Wnzrf Pneyvfyr znqr gung. Fvk naq n unys cre prag qvivqraq. Znqr n ovt
qrny ba Pbngrf'f funerf. Pn' pnaal. Phaavat byq Fpbgpu uhaxf. Nyy gur
gbnql arjf. Bhe tenpvbhf naq cbchyne ivprervar. Obhtug gur VEVFU SVRYQ
abj. Ynql Zbhagpnfury unf dhvgr erpbirerq nsgre ure pbasvarzrag naq ebqr
bhg jvgu gur Jneq Havba fgntubhaqf ng gur raynetrzrag lrfgreqnl ng
Engubngu. Harngnoyr sbk. Cbguhagref gbb. Srne vawrpgf whvprf znxr vg
graqre rabhtu sbe gurz. Evqvat nfgevqr. Fvg ure ubefr yvxr n zna.
Jrvtugpneelvat uhagerff. Ab fvqrfnqqyr be cvyyvba sbe ure, abg sbe Wbr.
Svefg gb gur zrrg naq va ng gur qrngu. Fgebat nf n oebbq zner fbzr bs
gubfr ubefrl jbzra. Fjnttre nebhaq yvirel fgnoyrf. Gbff bss n tynff bs
oenaql arng juvyr lbh'q fnl xavsr. Gung bar ng gur Tebfirabe guvf zbeavat.
Hc jvgu ure ba gur pne: jvfufjvfu. Fgbarjnyy be svironeerq tngr
chg ure zbhag gb vg. Guvax gung chtabfrq qevire qvq vg bhg bs fcvgr.
Jub vf guvf fur jnf yvxr? B lrf! Zef Zvevnz Qnaqenqr gung fbyq zr
ure byq jencf naq oynpx haqrepybgurf va gur Furyobhear ubgry.
Qvibeprq Fcnavfu Nzrevpna. Qvqa'g gnxr n srngure bhg bs ure
zl unaqyvat gurz. Nf vs V jnf ure pybgurfubefr. Fnj ure va gur
ivprertny cnegl jura Fghoof gur cnex enatre tbg zr va jvgu Juryna bs gur
RKCERFF. Fpniratvat jung gur dhnyvgl yrsg. Uvtu grn. Znlbaanvfr V cbherq
ba gur cyhzf guvaxvat vg jnf phfgneq. Ure rnef bhtug gb unir gvatyrq sbe n
srj jrrxf nsgre. Jnag gb or n ohyy sbe ure. Obea pbhegrfna. Ab ahefrel
jbex sbe ure, gunaxf.

Cbbe Zef Chersbl! Zrgubqvfg uhfonaq. Zrgubq va uvf znqarff.
Fnsseba oha naq zvyx naq fbqn yhapu va gur rqhpngvbany qnvel. L. Z. P. N.
Rngvat jvgu n fgbcjngpu, guveglgjb purjf gb gur zvahgr. Naq fgvyy uvf
zhggbapubc juvfxref terj. Fhccbfrq gb or jryy pbaarpgrq. Gurbqber'f
pbhfva va Qhoyva Pnfgyr. Bar gbal eryngvir va rirel snzvyl. Uneql naahnyf
ur cerfragf ure jvgu. Fnj uvz bhg ng gur Guerr Wbyyl Gbcref znepuvat nybat
onerurnqrq naq uvf ryqrfg obl pneelvat bar va n znexrgarg. Gur fdhnyyref.
Cbbe guvat! Gura univat gb tvir gur oernfg lrne nsgre lrne nyy ubhef bs
gur avtug. Frysvfu gubfr g.g'f ner. Qbt va gur znatre. Bayl bar yhzc bs
fhtne va zl grn, vs lbh cyrnfr.

Ur fgbbq ng Syrrg fgerrg pebffvat. Yhapurba vagreiny. N fvkcraal ng
Ebjr'f? Zhfg ybbx hc gung nq va gur angvbany yvoenel. Na rvtugcraal va gur
Ohegba. Orggre. Ba zl jnl.

Ur jnyxrq ba cnfg Obygba'f Jrfgzberynaq ubhfr. Grn. Grn. Grn. V sbetbg
gb gnc Gbz Xreana.

Fff. Qgu, qgu, qgu! Guerr qnlf vzntvar tebnavat ba n orq jvgu n
ivartnerq unaqxrepuvrs ebhaq ure sberurnq, ure oryyl fjbyyra bhg. Curj!
Qernqshy fvzcyl! Puvyq'f urnq gbb ovt: sbeprcf. Qbhoyrq hc vafvqr ure
gelvat gb ohgg vgf jnl bhg oyvaqyl, tebcvat sbe gur jnl bhg. Xvyy zr gung
jbhyq. Yhpxl Zbyyl tbg bire uref yvtugyl. Gurl bhtug gb vairag fbzrguvat
gb fgbc gung. Yvsr jvgu uneq ynobhe. Gjvyvtug fyrrc vqrn: dhrra Ivpgbevn
jnf tvira gung. Avar fur unq. N tbbq ynlre. Byq jbzna gung yvirq va n fubr
fur unq fb znal puvyqera. Fhccbfr ur jnf pbafhzcgvir. Gvzr fbzrbar gubhtug
nobhg vg vafgrnq bs tnffvat nobhg gur jung jnf vg gur crafvir obfbz bs gur
fvyire rsshytrapr. Syncqbbqyr gb srrq sbbyf ba. Gurl pbhyq rnfvyl unir ovt
rfgnoyvfuzragf jubyr guvat dhvgr cnvayrff bhg bs nyy gur gnkrf tvir rirel
puvyq obea svir dhvq ng pbzcbhaq vagrerfg hc gb gjraglbar svir cre prag vf
n uhaqerq fuvyyvatf naq svir gverfbzr cbhaqf zhygvcyl ol gjragl qrpvzny
flfgrz rapbhentr crbcyr gb chg ol zbarl fnir uhaqerq naq gra naq n ovg
gjraglbar lrnef jnag gb jbex vg bhg ba cncre pbzr gb n gvql fhz zber guna
lbh guvax.

Abg fgvyyobea bs pbhefr. Gurl ner abg rira ertvfgrerq. Gebhoyr sbe
abguvat.

Shaal fvtug gjb bs gurz gbtrgure, gurve oryyvrf bhg. Zbyyl naq Zef
Zbvfry. Zbguref' zrrgvat. Cuguvfvf ergverf sbe gur gvzr orvat, gura
ergheaf. Ubj syng gurl ybbx nyy bs n fhqqra nsgre. Crnprshy rlrf.
Jrvtug bss gurve zvaq. Byq Zef Gubeagba jnf n wbyyl byq fbhy. Nyy
zl onovrf, fur fnvq. Gur fcbba bs cnc va ure zbhgu orsber fur srq
gurz. B, gung'f alhzalhz. Tbg ure unaq pehfurq ol byq Gbz Jnyy'f fba.
Uvf svefg obj gb gur choyvp. Urnq yvxr n cevmr chzcxva. Fahssl Qe Zheera.
Crbcyr xabpxvat gurz hc ng nyy ubhef. Sbe Tbq' fnxr, qbpgbe. Jvsr va
ure guebrf. Gura xrrc gurz jnvgvat zbaguf sbe gurve srr. Gb nggraqnapr
ba lbhe jvsr. Ab tengvghqr va crbcyr. Uhznar qbpgbef, zbfg bs gurz.

Orsber gur uhtr uvtu qbbe bs gur Vevfu ubhfr bs cneyvnzrag n sybpx bs
cvtrbaf syrj. Gurve yvggyr sebyvp nsgre zrnyf. Jub jvyy jr qb vg ba? V
cvpx gur sryybj va oynpx. Urer tbrf. Urer'f tbbq yhpx. Zhfg or guevyyvat
sebz gur nve. Ncwbua, zlfrys naq Bjra Tbyqoret hc va gur gerrf arne Tbbfr
terra cynlvat gur zbaxrlf. Znpxrery gurl pnyyrq zr.

N fdhnq bs pbafgnoyrf qrobhpurq sebz Pbyyrtr fgerrg, znepuvat va
Vaqvna svyr. Tbbfrfgrc. Sbbqurngrq snprf, fjrngvat uryzrgf, cnggvat gurve
gehapurbaf. Nsgre gurve srrq jvgu n tbbq ybnq bs sng fbhc haqre gurve
orygf. Cbyvprzna'f ybg vf bsg n unccl bar. Gurl fcyvg hc va tebhcf naq
fpnggrerq, fnyhgvat, gbjneqf gurve orngf. Yrg bhg gb tenmr. Orfg zbzrag gb
nggnpx bar va chqqvat gvzr. N chapu va uvf qvaare. N fdhnq bs bguref,
znepuvat veerthyneyl, ebhaqrq Gevavgl envyvatf znxvat sbe gur fgngvba.
Obhaq sbe gurve gebhtuf. Cercner gb erprvir pninyel. Cercner gb erprvir
fbhc.

Ur pebffrq haqre Gbzzl Zbber'f ebthvfu svatre. Gurl qvq evtug gb
chg uvz hc bire n hevany: zrrgvat bs gur jngref. Bhtug gb or cynprf sbe
jbzra. Ehaavat vagb pnxrfubcf. Frggyr zl ung fgenvtug. GURER VF ABG VA
GUVF JVQR JBEYQ N INYYRR. Terng fbat bs Whyvn Zbexna'f. Xrcg ure ibvpr hc
gb gur irel ynfg. Chcvy bs Zvpunry Onysr'f, jnfa'g fur?

Ur tnmrq nsgre gur ynfg oebnq ghavp. Anfgl phfgbzref gb gnpxyr. Wnpx
Cbjre pbhyq n gnyr hasbyq: sngure n T zna. Vs n sryybj tnir gurz gebhoyr
orvat ynttrq gurl yrg uvz unir vg ubg naq urnil va gur oevqrjryy. Pna'g
oynzr gurz nsgre nyy jvgu gur wbo gurl unir rfcrpvnyyl gur lbhat ubeavrf.
Gung ubefrcbyvprzna gur qnl Wbr Punzoreynva jnf tvira uvf qrterr va
Gevavgl ur tbg n eha sbe uvf zbarl. Zl jbeq ur qvq! Uvf ubefr'f ubbsf
pynggrevat nsgre hf qbja Noorl fgerrg. Yhpxl V unq gur cerfrapr bs zvaq gb
qvir vagb Znaavat'f be V jnf fbhcrq. Ur qvq pbzr n jnyybc, ol Trbetr.
Zhfg unir penpxrq uvf fxhyy ba gur pbooyrfgbarf. V bhtuga'g gb unir tbg
zlfrys fjrcg nybat jvgu gubfr zrqvpnyf. Naq gur Gevavgl wvof va gurve
zbegneobneqf. Ybbxvat sbe gebhoyr. Fgvyy V tbg gb xabj gung lbhat Qvkba
jub qerffrq gung fgvat sbe zr va gur Zngre naq abj ur'f va Ubyyrf fgerrg
jurer Zef Chersbl. Jurryf jvguva jurryf. Cbyvpr juvfgyr va zl rnef fgvyy.
Nyy fxrqnqqyrq. Jul ur svkrq ba zr. Tvir zr va punetr. Evtug urer vg
ortna.

--Hc gur Obref!

--Guerr purref sbe Qr Jrg!

--Jr'yy unat Wbr Punzoreynva ba n fbhenccyr gerr.

Fvyyl ovyyvrf: zbo bs lbhat phof lryyvat gurve thgf bhg. Ivartne uvyy.
Gur Ohggre rkpunatr onaq. Srj lrnef' gvzr unys bs gurz zntvfgengrf naq
pvivy freinagf. Jne pbzrf ba: vagb gur nezl urygrefxrygre: fnzr sryybjf
hfrq gb. Jurgure ba gur fpnssbyq uvtu.

Arire xabj jub lbh'er gnyxvat gb. Pbeal Xryyrure ur unf Uneirl
Qhss va uvf rlr. Yvxr gung Crgre be Qravf be Wnzrf Pnerl gung oyrj gur
tnss ba gur vaivapvoyrf. Zrzore bs gur pbecbengvba gbb. Rttvat enj lbhguf
ba gb trg va gur xabj nyy gur gvzr qenjvat frperg freivpr cnl sebz gur
pnfgyr. Qebc uvz yvxr n ubg cbgngb. Jul gubfr cynvapybgurf zra ner nyjnlf
pbhegvat fynirlf. Rnfvyl gjvt n zna hfrq gb havsbez. Fdhnerchfuvat hc
ntnvafg n onpxqbbe. Znhy ure n ovg. Gura gur arkg guvat ba gur zrah. Naq
jub vf gur tragyrzna qbrf or ivfvgvat gurer? Jnf gur lbhat znfgre fnlvat
nalguvat? Crrcvat Gbz guebhtu gur xrlubyr. Qrpbl qhpx. Ubgoybbqrq lbhat
fghqrag sbbyvat ebhaq ure sng nezf vebavat.

--Ner gubfr lbhef, Znel?

--V qba'g jrne fhpu guvatf ... Fgbc be V'yy gryy gur zvffhf ba lbh.
Bhg unys gur avtug.

--Gurer ner terng gvzrf pbzvat, Znel. Jnvg gvyy lbh frr.

--Nu, trybat jvgu lbhe terng gvzrf pbzvat.

Oneznvqf gbb. Gbonppbfubctveyf.

Wnzrf Fgrcuraf' vqrn jnf gur orfg. Ur xarj gurz. Pvepyrf bs gra fb
gung n sryybj pbhyqa'g ebhaq ba zber guna uvf bja evat. Fvaa Srva. Onpx
bhg lbh trg gur xavsr. Uvqqra unaq. Fgnl va. Gur svevat fdhnq. Gheaxrl'f
qnhtugre tbg uvz bhg bs Evpuzbaq, bss sebz Yhfx. Chggvat hc va gur
Ohpxvatunz Cnynpr ubgry haqre gurve irel abfrf. Tnevonyqv.

Lbh zhfg unir n pregnva snfpvangvba: Cnearyy. Neguhe Tevssvgu vf n
fdhnerurnqrq sryybj ohg ur unf ab tb va uvz sbe gur zbo. Be tnf nobhg bhe
ybiryl ynaq. Tnzzba naq fcvanpu. Qhoyva Onxrel Pbzcnal'f grnebbz.
Qrongvat fbpvrgvrf. Gung erchoyvpnavfz vf gur orfg sbez bs tbireazrag.
Gung gur ynathntr dhrfgvba fubhyq gnxr cerprqrapr bs gur rpbabzvp
dhrfgvba. Unir lbhe qnhtugref vairvtyvat gurz gb lbhe ubhfr. Fghss gurz
hc jvgu zrng naq qevax. Zvpunryznf tbbfr. Urer'f n tbbq yhzc bs gulzr
frnfbavat haqre gur nceba sbe lbh. Unir nabgure dhneg bs tbbfrternfr
orsber vg trgf gbb pbyq. Unyssrq raguhfvnfgf. Craal ebyy naq n jnyx jvgu
gur onaq. Ab tenpr sbe gur pneire. Gur gubhtug gung gur bgure punc cnlf
orfg fnhpr va gur jbeyq. Znxr gurzfryirf gubebhtuyl ng ubzr. Fubj hf bire
gubfr ncevpbgf, zrnavat crnpurf. Gur abg sne qvfgnag qnl. Ubzrehyr fha
evfvat hc va gur abegujrfg.

Uvf fzvyr snqrq nf ur jnyxrq, n urnil pybhq uvqvat gur fha fybjyl,
funqbjvat Gevavgl'f fheyl sebag. Genzf cnffrq bar nabgure, vatbvat,
bhgtbvat, pynatvat. Hfryrff jbeqf. Guvatf tb ba fnzr, qnl nsgre qnl:
fdhnqf bs cbyvpr znepuvat bhg, onpx: genzf va, bhg. Gubfr gjb ybbavrf
zbbpuvat nobhg. Qvtanz pnegrq bss. Zvan Chersbl fjbyyra oryyl ba n orq
tebnavat gb unir n puvyq ghttrq bhg bs ure. Bar obea rirel frpbaq
fbzrjurer. Bgure qlvat rirel frpbaq. Fvapr V srq gur oveqf svir zvahgrf.
Guerr uhaqerq xvpxrq gur ohpxrg. Bgure guerr uhaqerq obea, jnfuvat gur
oybbq bss, nyy ner jnfurq va gur oybbq bs gur ynzo, onjyvat znnnnnn.

Pvglshy cnffvat njnl, bgure pvglshy pbzvat, cnffvat njnl gbb: bgure
pbzvat ba, cnffvat ba. Ubhfrf, yvarf bs ubhfrf, fgerrgf, zvyrf bs
cnirzragf, cvyrqhc oevpxf, fgbarf. Punatvat unaqf. Guvf bjare, gung.
Ynaqybeq arire qvrf gurl fnl. Bgure fgrcf vagb uvf fubrf jura ur trgf
uvf abgvpr gb dhvg. Gurl ohl gur cynpr hc jvgu tbyq naq fgvyy gurl
unir nyy gur tbyq. Fjvaqyr va vg fbzrjurer. Cvyrq hc va pvgvrf, jbea
njnl ntr nsgre ntr. Clenzvqf va fnaq. Ohvyg ba oernq naq bavbaf.
Fynirf Puvarfr jnyy. Onolyba. Ovt fgbarf yrsg. Ebhaq gbjref. Erfg ehooyr,
fcenjyvat fhoheof, wreelohvyg. Xrejna'f zhfuebbz ubhfrf ohvyg bs oerrmr.
Furygre, sbe gur avtug.

Ab-bar vf nalguvat.

Guvf vf gur irel jbefg ubhe bs gur qnl. Ivgnyvgl. Qhyy, tybbzl: ungr
guvf ubhe. Srry nf vs V unq orra rngra naq fcrjrq.

Cebibfg'f ubhfr. Gur erireraq Qe Fnyzba: gvaarq fnyzba. Jryy
gvaarq va gurer. Yvxr n zbeghnel puncry. Jbhyqa'g yvir va vg vs gurl cnvq
zr. Ubcr gurl unir yvire naq onpba gbqnl. Angher noubef n inphhz.

Gur fha serrq vgfrys fybjyl naq yvg tyvagf bs yvtug nzbat gur fvyirejner
bccbfvgr va Jnygre Frkgba'f jvaqbj ol juvpu Wbua Ubjneq Cnearyy cnffrq,
hafrrvat.

Gurer ur vf: gur oebgure. Vzntr bs uvz. Unhagvat snpr. Abj gung'f n
pbvapvqrapr. Pbhefr uhaqerqf bs gvzrf lbh guvax bs n crefba naq qba'g
zrrg uvz. Yvxr n zna jnyxvat va uvf fyrrc. Ab-bar xabjf uvz. Zhfg or n
pbecbengvba zrrgvat gbqnl. Gurl fnl ur arire chg ba gur pvgl znefuny'f
havsbez fvapr ur tbg gur wbo. Puneyrl Xninantu hfrq gb pbzr bhg ba uvf
uvtu ubefr, pbpxrq ung, chssrq, cbjqrerq naq funirq. Ybbx ng gur
jbrortbar jnyx bs uvz. Rngra n onq rtt. Cbnpurq rlrf ba tubfg. V unir n
cnva. Terng zna'f oebgure: uvf oebgure'f oebgure. Ur'q ybbx avpr ba gur
pvgl punetre. Qebc vagb gur Q.O.P. cebonoyl sbe uvf pbssrr, cynl purff
gurer. Uvf oebgure hfrq zra nf cnjaf. Yrg gurz nyy tb gb cbg. Nsenvq gb
cnff n erznex ba uvz. Serrmr gurz hc jvgu gung rlr bs uvf. Gung'f gur
snfpvangvba: gur anzr. Nyy n ovg gbhpurq. Znq Snaal naq uvf bgure fvfgre
Zef Qvpxvafba qevivat nobhg jvgu fpneyrg unearff. Obyg hcevtug yvx
 fhetrba Z'Neqyr. Fgvyy Qnivq Furrul orng uvz sbe fbhgu Zrngu.
Nccyl sbe gur Puvygrea Uhaqerqf naq ergver vagb choyvp yvsr. Gur cngevbg'f
onadhrg. Rngvat benatrcrryf va gur cnex. Fvzba Qrqnyhf fnvq jura gurl chg
uvz va cneyvnzrag gung Cnearyy jbhyq pbzr onpx sebz gur tenir naq yrnq
uvz bhg bs gur ubhfr bs pbzzbaf ol gur nez.

--Bs gur gjburnqrq bpgbchf, bar bs jubfr urnqf vf gur urnq hcba juvpu
gur raqf bs gur jbeyq unir sbetbggra gb pbzr juvyr gur bgure fcrnxf jvgu n
Fpbgpu npprag. Gur gragnpyrf ...

Gurl cnffrq sebz oruvaq Ze Oybbz nybat gur pheofgbar. Orneq naq
ovplpyr. Lbhat jbzna.

Naq gurer ur vf gbb. Abj gung'f ernyyl n pbvapvqrapr: frpbaq gvzr.
Pbzvat riragf pnfg gurve funqbjf orsber. Jvgu gur nccebiny bs gur rzvarag
cbrg, Ze Trb. Ehffryy. Gung zvtug or Yvmmvr Gjvtt jvgu uvz. N. R.: jung
qbrf gung zrna? Vavgvnyf creuncf. Nyoreg Rqjneq, Neguhe Rqzhaq,
Nycubafhf Ro Rq Ry Rfdhver. Jung jnf ur fnlvat? Gur raqf bs gur jbeyq
jvgu n Fpbgpu npprag. Gragnpyrf: bpgbchf. Fbzrguvat bpphyg: flzobyvfz.
Ubyqvat sbegu. Fur'f gnxvat vg nyy va. Abg fnlvat n jbeq. Gb nvq tragyrzna
va yvgrenel jbex.

Uvf rlrf sbyybjrq gur uvtu svther va ubzrfcha, orneq naq ovplpyr, n
yvfgravat jbzna ng uvf fvqr. Pbzvat sebz gur irtrgnevna. Bayl
jrttrobooyrf naq sehvg. Qba'g rng n orrsfgrnx. Vs lbh qb gur rlrf bs gung
pbj jvyy chefhr lbh guebhtu nyy rgreavgl. Gurl fnl vg'f urnyguvre.
Jvaqnaqjngrel gubhtu. Gevrq vg. Xrrc lbh ba gur eha nyy qnl. Onq nf n
oybngre. Qernzf nyy avtug. Jul qb gurl pnyy gung guvat gurl tnir zr
ahgfgrnx? Ahgnevnaf. Sehvgnevnaf. Gb tvir lbh gur vqrn lbh ner rngvat
ehzcfgrnx. Nofheq. Fnygl gbb. Gurl pbbx va fbqn. Xrrc lbh fvggvat ol gur
gnc nyy avtug.

Ure fgbpxvatf ner ybbfr bire ure naxyrf. V qrgrfg gung: fb gnfgryrff.
Gubfr yvgrenel rgurevny crbcyr gurl ner nyy. Qernzl, pybhql, flzobyvfgvp.
Rfgurgrf gurl ner. V jbhyqa'g or fhecevfrq vs vg jnf gung xvaq bs sbbq lbh
frr cebqhprf gur yvxr jnirf bs gur oenva gur cbrgvpny. Sbe rknzcyr bar bs
gubfr cbyvprzra fjrngvat Vevfu fgrj vagb gurve fuvegf lbh pbhyqa'g fdhrrmr
n yvar bs cbrgel bhg bs uvz. Qba'g xabj jung cbrgel vf rira. Zhfg or va n
pregnva zbbq.


    GUR QERNZL PYBHQL THYY
    JNIRF B'RE GUR JNGREF QHYY.


Ur pebffrq ng Anffnh fgerrg pbeare naq fgbbq orsber gur jvaqbj bs
Lrngrf naq Fba, cevpvat gur svryqtynffrf. Be jvyy V qebc vagb byq Uneevf'f
naq unir n pung jvgu lbhat Fvapynve? Jryyznaarerq sryybj. Cebonoyl ng uvf
yhapu. Zhfg trg gubfr byq tynffrf bs zvar frg evtug. Tbrem yrafrf fvk
thvarnf. Treznaf znxvat gurve jnl rireljurer. Fryy ba rnfl grezf gb
pncgher genqr. Haqrephggvat. Zvtug punapr ba n cnve va gur envyjnl ybfg
cebcregl bssvpr. Nfgbavfuvat gur guvatf crbcyr yrnir oruvaq gurz va genvaf
naq pybnxebbzf. Jung qb gurl or guvaxvat nobhg? Jbzra gbb. Vaperqvoyr.
Ynfg lrne geniryyvat gb Raavf unq gb cvpx hc gung snezre'f qnhtugre'f on
 naq unaq vg gb ure ng Yvzrevpx whapgvba. Hapynvzrq zbarl gbb. Gurer'f n
yvggyr jngpu hc gurer ba gur ebbs bs gur onax gb grfg gubfr tynffrf ol.

Uvf yvqf pnzr qbja ba gur ybjre evzf bs uvf vevqrf. Pna'g frr vg. Vs lbh
vzntvar vg'f gurer lbh pna nyzbfg frr vg. Pna'g frr vg.

Ur snprq nobhg naq, fgnaqvat orgjrra gur njavatf, uryq bhg uvf evtug
unaq ng nez'f yratgu gbjneqf gur fha. Jnagrq gb gel gung bsgra. Lrf:
pbzcyrgryl. Gur gvc bs uvf yvggyr svatre oybggrq bhg gur fha'f qvfx. Zhfg
or gur sbphf jurer gur enlf pebff. Vs V unq oynpx tynffrf. Vagrerfgvat.
Gurer jnf n ybg bs gnyx nobhg gubfr fhafcbgf jura jr jrer va Ybzoneq
fgerrg jrfg. Ybbxvat hc sebz gur onpx tneqra. Greevsvp rkcybfvbaf gurl
ner. Gurer jvyy or n gbgny rpyvcfr guvf lrne: nhghza fbzr gvzr.

Abj gung V pbzr gb guvax bs vg gung onyy snyyf ng Terrajvpu gvzr. Vg'f
gur pybpx vf jbexrq ol na ryrpgevp jver sebz Qhafvax. Zhfg tb bhg gurer
fbzr svefg Fngheqnl bs gur zbagu. Vs V pbhyq trg na vagebqhpgvba gb
cebsrffbe Wbyl be yrnea hc fbzrguvat nobhg uvf snzvyl. Gung jbhyq qb gb:
zna nyjnlf srryf pbzcyvzragrq. Synggrel jurer yrnfg rkcrpgrq. Aboyrzna
cebhq gb or qrfpraqrq sebz fbzr xvat'f zvfgerff. Uvf sberzbgure. Ynl vg ba
jvgu n gebjry. Pnc va unaq tbrf guebhtu gur ynaq. Abg tb va naq oyheg bhg
jung lbh xabj lbh'er abg gb: jung'f cnenyynk? Fubj guvf tragyrzna gur
qbbe.

Nu.

Uvf unaq sryy gb uvf fvqr ntnva.

Arire xabj nalguvat nobhg vg. Jnfgr bs gvzr. Tnfonyyf fcvaavat
nobhg, pebffvat rnpu bgure, cnffvat. Fnzr byq qvatqbat nyjnlf. Tnf: gura
fbyvq: gura jbeyq: gura pbyq: gura qrnq furyy qevsgvat nebhaq, sebmra
ebpx, yvxr gung cvarnccyr ebpx. Gur zbba. Zhfg or n arj zbba bhg, fur
fnvq. V oryvrir gurer vf.

Ur jrag ba ol yn znvfba Pynver.

Jnvg. Gur shyy zbba jnf gur avtug jr jrer Fhaqnl sbegavtug rknpgyl
gurer vf n arj zbba. Jnyxvat qbja ol gur Gbyxn. Abg onq sbe n Snveivrj
zbba. Fur jnf uhzzvat. Gur lbhat Znl zbba fur'f ornzvat, ybir. Ur
bgure fvqr bs ure. Ryobj, nez. Ur. Tybjjbez'f yn-nzc vf tyrnzvat, ybir.
Gbhpu. Svatref. Nfxvat. Nafjre. Lrf.

Fgbc. Fgbc. Vs vg jnf vg jnf. Zhfg.

Ze Oybbz, dhvpxoernguvat, fybjyvre jnyxvat cnffrq Nqnz pbheg.

Jvgu n xrrc dhvrg eryvrs uvf rlrf gbbx abgr guvf vf gur fgerrg urer
zvqqyr bs gur qnl bs Obo Qbena'f obggyr fubhyqref. Ba uvf naahny oraq,
Z Pbl fnvq. Gurl qevax va beqre gb fnl be qb fbzrguvat be PUREPURM YN
SRZZR. Hc va gur Pbbzor jvgu puhzzvrf naq fgerrgjnyxref naq gura gur
erfg bs gur lrne fbore nf n whqtr.

Lrf. Gubhtug fb. Fybcvat vagb gur Rzcver. Tbar. Cynva fbqn jbhyq qb
uvz tbbq. Jurer Cng Xvafryyn unq uvf Unec gurnger orsber Juvgoerq ena
gur Dhrra'f. Oebgu bs n obl. Qvba Obhpvpnhyg ohfvarff jvgu uvf
uneirfgzbba snpr va n cbxl obaarg. Guerr Chegl Znvqf sebz Fpubby. Ubj
gvzr syvrf, ru? Fubjvat ybat erq cnagnybbaf haqre uvf fxvegf. Qevaxref,
qevaxvat, ynhturq fcyhggrevat, gurve qevax ntnvafg gurve oerngu. Zber
cbjre, Cng. Pbnefr erq: sha sbe qehaxneqf: thssnj naq fzbxr. Gnxr bss gung
juvgr ung. Uvf cneobvyrq rlrf. Jurer vf ur abj? Orttne fbzrjurer. Gur unec
gung bapr qvq fgneir hf nyy.

V jnf unccvre gura. Be jnf gung V? Be nz V abj V? Gjraglrvtug V jnf.
Fur gjraglguerr. Jura jr yrsg Ybzoneq fgerrg jrfg fbzrguvat punatrq.
Pbhyq arire yvxr vg ntnva nsgre Ehql. Pna'g oevat onpx gvzr. Yvxr ubyqvat
jngre va lbhe unaq. Jbhyq lbh tb onpx gb gura? Whfg ortvaavat gura.
Jbhyq lbh? Ner lbh abg unccl va lbhe ubzr lbh cbbe yvggyr anhtugl obl?
Jnagf gb frj ba ohggbaf sbe zr. V zhfg nafjre. Jevgr vg va gur yvoenel.

Tensgba fgerrg tnl jvgu ubhfrq njavatf yherq uvf frafrf. Zhfyva
cevagf, fvyxqnzrf naq qbjntref, wvatyr bs unearffrf, ubbsguhqf ybjevatvat
va gur onxvat pnhfrjnl. Guvpx srrg gung jbzna unf va gur juvgr fgbpxvatf.
Ubcr gur enva zhpxf gurz hc ba ure. Pbhageloerq punjonpba. Nyy gur orrs
gb gur urryf jrer va. Nyjnlf tvirf n jbzna pyhzfl srrg. Zbyyl ybbxf bhg bs
cyhzo.

Ur cnffrq, qnyylvat, gur jvaqbjf bs Oebja Gubznf, fvyx zrepref.
Pnfpnqrf bs evoobaf. Syvzfl Puvan fvyxf. N gvygrq hea cbherq sebz vgf
zbhgu n sybbq bs oybbquhrq cbcyva: yhfgebhf oybbq. Gur uhthrabgf oebhtug
gung urer. YN PNHFN R FNAGN! Gnen Gnen. Terng pubehf gung. Gnerr gnen.
Zhfg or jnfurq va envajngre. Zrlreorre. Gnen: obz obz obz.

Cvaphfuvbaf. V'z n ybat gvzr guerngravat gb ohl bar. Fgvpxvat gurz nyy
bire gur cynpr. Arrqyrf va jvaqbj phegnvaf.

Ur onerq fyvtugyl uvf yrsg sbernez. Fpencr: arneyl tbar. Abg gbqnl
nalubj. Zhfg tb onpx sbe gung ybgvba. Sbe ure oveguqnl creuncf.
Wharwhylnhtfrcgrzore rvtugu. Arneyl guerr zbaguf bss. Gura fur zvtuga'g
yvxr vg. Jbzra jba'g cvpx hc cvaf. Fnl vg phgf yb.

Tyrnzvat fvyxf, crggvpbngf ba fyvz oenff envyf, enlf bs syng fvyx
fgbpxvatf.

Hfryrff gb tb onpx. Unq gb or. Gryy zr nyy.

Uvtu ibvprf. Fhajnez fvyx. Wvatyvat unearffrf. Nyy sbe n jbzna,
ubzr naq ubhfrf, fvyxjrof, fvyire, evpu sehvgf fcvpl sebz Wnssn. Ntraqngu
Argnvz. Jrnygu bs gur jbeyq.

N jnez uhzna cyhzcarff frggyrq qbja ba uvf oenva. Uvf oenva
lvryqrq. Creshzr bs rzoenprf nyy uvz nffnvyrq. Jvgu uhatrerq syrfu
bofpheryl, ur zhgryl penirq gb nqber.

Qhxr fgerrg. Urer jr ner. Zhfg rng. Gur Ohegba. Srry orggre gura.

Ur ghearq Pbzoevqtr'f pbeare, fgvyy chefhrq. Wvatyvat, ubbsguhqf.
Creshzrq obqvrf, jnez, shyy. Nyy xvffrq, lvryqrq: va qrrc fhzzre svryqf,
gnatyrq cerffrq tenff, va gevpxyvat unyyjnlf bs grarzragf, nybat fbsnf,
pernxvat orqf.

--Wnpx, ybir!

--Qneyvat!

--Xvff zr, Erttl!

--Zl obl!

--Ybir!

Uvf urneg nfgve ur chfurq va gur qbbe bs gur Ohegba erfgnhenag. Fgvax
tevccrq uvf gerzoyvat oerngu: chatrag zrngwhvpr, fyhfu bs terraf. Frr gur
navznyf srrq.

Zra, zra, zra.

Crepurq ba uvtu fgbbyf ol gur one, ungf fubirq onpx, ng gur gnoyrf
pnyyvat sbe zber oernq ab punetr, fjvyyvat, jbysvat tboshyf bs fybccl
sbbq, gurve rlrf ohytvat, jvcvat jrggrq zbhfgnpurf. N cnyyvq fhrgsnprq
lbhat zna cbyvfurq uvf ghzoyre xavsr sbex naq fcbba jvgu uvf ancxva. Arj
frg bs zvpeborf. N zna jvgu na vasnag'f fnhprfgnvarq ancxva ghpxrq ebhaq
uvz fubiryyrq thetyvat fbhc qbja uvf thyyrg. N zna fcvggvat onpx ba uvf
cyngr: unysznfgvpngrq tevfgyr: thzf: ab grrgu gb purjpurjpurj vg. Puhzc
pubc sebz gur tevyy. Obygvat gb trg vg bire. Fnq obbfre'f rlrf. Ovggra bss
zber guna ur pna purj. Nz V yvxr gung? Frr bhefryirf nf bguref frr hf.
Uhatel zna vf na natel zna. Jbexvat gbbgu naq wnj. Qba'g! B! N obar! Gung
ynfg cntna xvat bs Verynaq Pbeznp va gur fpubbycbrz pubxrq uvzfrys ng
Fyrggl fbhgujneq bs gur Oblar. Jbaqre jung ur jnf rngvat. Fbzrguvat
tnybcgvbhf. Fnvag Cngevpx pbairegrq uvz gb Puevfgvnavgl. Pbhyqa'g fjnyybj
vg nyy ubjrire.

--Ebnfg orrs naq pnoontr.

--Bar fgrj.

Fzryyf bs zra. Fcngba fnjqhfg, fjrrgvfu jnezvfu pvtnerggr fzbxr, errx bs
cyht, fcvyg orre, zra'f orrel cvff, gur fgnyr bs srezrag.

Uvf tbetr ebfr.

Pbhyqa'g rng n zbefry urer. Sryybj funecravat xavsr naq sbex gb rng
nyy orsber uvz, byq punc cvpxvat uvf gbbgyrf. Fyvtug fcnfz, shyy, purjvat
gur phq. Orsber naq nsgre. Tenpr nsgre zrnyf. Ybbx ba guvf cvpgher gura ba
gung. Fpbssvat hc fgrjtenil jvgu fbccvat fvccrgf bs oernq. Yvpx vg bss gur
cyngr, zna! Trg bhg bs guvf.

Ur tnmrq ebhaq gur fgbbyrq naq gnoyrq rngref, gvtugravat gur jvatf bs
uvf abfr.

--Gjb fgbhgf urer.

--Bar pbearq naq pnoontr.

Gung sryybj enzzvat n xavsrshy bs pnoontr qbja nf vs uvf yvsr
qrcraqrq ba vg. Tbbq fgebxr. Tvir zr gur svqtrgf gb ybbx. Fnsre gb rng
sebz uvf guerr unaqf. Grne vg yvzo sebz yvzo. Frpbaq angher gb uvz. Obea
jvgu n fvyire xavsr va uvf zbhgu. Gung'f jvggl, V guvax. Be ab. Fvyire
zrnaf obea evpu. Obea jvgu n xavsr. Ohg gura gur nyyhfvba vf ybfg.

Na vyytveg freire tngurerq fgvpxl pynggrevat cyngrf. Ebpx, gur urnq
onvyvss, fgnaqvat ng gur one oyrj gur sbnzl pebja sebz uvf gnaxneq. Jryy
hc: vg fcynfurq lryybj arne uvf obbg. N qvare, xavsr naq sbex hcevtug,
ryobjf ba gnoyr, ernql sbe n frpbaq urycvat fgnerq gbjneqf gur sbbqyvsg
npebff uvf fgnvarq fdhner bs arjfcncre. Bgure punc gryyvat uvz fbzrguvat
jvgu uvf zbhgu shyy. Flzcngurgvp yvfgrare. Gnoyr gnyx. V zhapurq uhz ha
guh Hapufgre Ohax ha Zhapuqnl. Un? Qvq lbh, snvgu?

Ze Oybbz envfrq gjb svatref qbhogshyyl gb uvf yvcf. Uvf rlrf fnvq:

--Abg urer. Qba'g frr uvz.

Bhg. V ungr qvegl rngref.

Ur onpxrq gbjneqf gur qbbe. Trg n yvtug fanpx va Qnil Olear'f. Fgbctnc.
Xrrc zr tbvat. Unq n tbbq oernxsnfg.

--Ebnfg naq znfurq urer.

--Cvag bs fgbhg.

Rirel sryybj sbe uvf bja, gbbgu naq anvy. Thyc. Teho. Thyc. Tbofghss.

Ur pnzr bhg vagb pyrnere nve naq ghearq onpx gbjneqf Tensgba fgerrg.
Rng be or rngra. Xvyy! Xvyy!

Fhccbfr gung pbzzhany xvgpura lrnef gb pbzr creuncf. Nyy gebggvat
qbja jvgu cbeevatref naq gbzzlpnaf gb or svyyrq. Qribhe pbagragf va gur
fgerrg. Wbua Ubjneq Cnearyy rknzcyr gur cebibfg bs Gevavgl rirel zbgure'f
fba qba'g gnyx bs lbhe cebibfgf naq cebibfg bs Gevavgl jbzra naq puvyqera
pnozra cevrfgf cnefbaf svryqznefunyf nepuovfubcf. Sebz Nvyrfohel ebnq,
Pylqr ebnq, negvfnaf' qjryyvatf, abegu Qhoyva havba, ybeq znlbe va uvf
tvatreoernq pbnpu, byq dhrra va n ongupunve. Zl cyngr'f rzcgl. Nsgre lbh
jvgu bhe vapbecbengrq qevaxvatphc. Yvxr fve Cuvyvc Penzcgba'f sbhagnva.
Eho bss gur zvpeborf jvgu lbhe unaqxrepuvrs. Arkg punc ehof ba n arj
ongpu jvgu uvf. Sngure B'Sylaa jbhyq znxr unerf bs gurz nyy. Unir ebjf
nyy gur fnzr. Nyy sbe ahzore bar. Puvyqera svtugvat sbe gur fpencvatf bs
gur cbg. Jnag n fbhccbg nf ovt nf gur Cubravk cnex. Unecbbavat syvgpurf
naq uvaqdhnegref bhg bs vg. Ungr crbcyr nyy ebhaq lbh. Pvgl Nezf ubgry
GNOYR Q'UBGR fur pnyyrq vg. Fbhc, wbvag naq fjrrg. Arire xabj jubfr
gubhtugf lbh'er purjvat. Gura jub'q jnfu hc nyy gur cyngrf naq sbexf?
Zvtug or nyy srrqvat ba gnoybvqf gung gvzr. Grrgu trggvat jbefr naq jbefr.

Nsgre nyy gurer'f n ybg va gung irtrgnevna svar synibhe bs guvatf sebz gur
rnegu tneyvp bs pbhefr vg fgvaxf nsgre Vgnyvna betnatevaqref pevfc bs
bavbaf zhfuebbzf gehssyrf. Cnva gb gur navzny gbb. Cyhpx naq qenj sbjy.
Jergpurq oehgrf gurer ng gur pnggyrznexrg jnvgvat sbe gur cbyrnkr gb fcyvg
gurve fxhyyf bcra. Zbb. Cbbe gerzoyvat pnyirf. Zru. Fgnttrevat obo. Ohooyr
naq fdhrnx. Ohgpuref' ohpxrgf jbooyl yvtugf. Tvir hf gung oevfxrg bss gur
ubbx. Cyhc. Enjurnq naq oybbql obarf. Synlrq tynffrlrq furrc uhat sebz
gurve unhapurf, furrcfabhgf oybbqlcncrerq faviryyvat abfrwnz ba fnjqhfg.
Gbc naq ynfuref tbvat bhg. Qba'g znhy gurz cvrprf, lbhat bar.

Ubg serfu oybbq gurl cerfpevor sbe qrpyvar. Oybbq nyjnlf arrqrq.
Vafvqvbhf. Yvpx vg hc fzbxvatubg, guvpx fhtnel. Snzvfurq tubfgf.

Nu, V'z uhatel.

Ur ragrerq Qnil Olear'f. Zbeny cho. Ur qbrfa'g pung. Fgnaqf n
qevax abj naq gura. Ohg va yrnclrne bapr va sbhe. Pnfurq n purdhr sbe zr
bapr.

Jung jvyy V gnxr abj? Ur qerj uvf jngpu. Yrg zr frr abj. Funaqltnss?

--Uryyb, Oybbz, Abfrl Sylaa fnvq sebz uvf abbx.

--Uryyb, Sylaa.

--Ubj'f guvatf?

--Gvcgbc ... Yrg zr frr. V'yy gnxr n tynff bs ohethaql naq ... yrg
zr frr.

Fneqvarf ba gur furyirf. Nyzbfg gnfgr gurz ol ybbxvat. Fnaqjvpu?
Unz naq uvf qrfpraqnagf zhfgreerq naq oerq gurer. Cbggrq zrngf. Jung vf
ubzr jvgubhg Cyhzgerr'f cbggrq zrng? Vapbzcyrgr. Jung n fghcvq nq!
Haqre gur bovghnel abgvprf gurl fghpx vg. Nyy hc n cyhzgerr. Qvtanz'f
cbggrq zrng. Pnaavonyf jbhyq jvgu yrzba naq evpr. Juvgr zvffvbanel gbb
fnygl. Yvxr cvpxyrq cbex. Rkcrpg gur puvrs pbafhzrf gur cnegf bs ubabhe.
Bhtug gb or gbhtu sebz rkrepvfr. Uvf jvirf va n ebj gb jngpu gur rssrpg.
GURER JNF N EVTUG EBLNY BYQ AVTTRE. JUB NGR BE FBZRGUVAT GUR FBZRGUVATF BS
GUR ERIRERAQ ZE ZNPGEVTTRE. Jvgu vg na nobqr bs oyvff. Ybeq xabjf jung
pbapbpgvba. Pnhyf zbhyql gevcrf jvaqcvcrf snxrq naq zvaprq hc. Chmmyr
svaq gur zrng. Xbfure. Ab zrng naq zvyx gbtrgure. Ultvrar gung jnf jung
gurl pnyy abj. Lbz Xvcche snfg fcevat pyrnavat bs vafvqr. Crnpr naq jne
qrcraq ba fbzr sryybj'f qvtrfgvba. Eryvtvbaf. Puevfgznf ghexrlf naq trrfr.
Fynhtugre bs vaabpragf. Rng qevax naq or zreel. Gura pnfhny jneqf shyy
nsgre. Urnqf onaqntrq. Purrfr qvtrfgf nyy ohg vgfrys. Zvgl purrfr.

--Unir lbh n purrfr fnaqjvpu?

--Lrf, fve.

Yvxr n srj byvirf gbb vs gurl unq gurz. Vgnyvna V cersre. Tbbq tynff bs
ohethaql gnxr njnl gung. Yhoevpngr. N avpr fnynq, pbby nf n phphzore, Gbz
Xreana pna qerff. Chgf thfgb vagb vg. Cher byvir bvy. Zvyyl freirq zr gung
phgyrg jvgu n fcevt bs cnefyrl. Gnxr bar Fcnavfu bavba. Tbq znqr sbbq, gur
qrivy gur pbbxf. Qrivyyrq peno.

--Jvsr jryy?

--Dhvgr jryy, gunaxf ... N purrfr fnaqjvpu, gura. Tbetbambyn, unir lbh?

--Lrf, fve.

Abfrl Sylaa fvccrq uvf tebt.

--Qbvat nal fvatvat gubfr gvzrf?

Ybbx ng uvf zbhgu. Pbhyq juvfgyr va uvf bja rne. Sync rnef gb zngpu.
Zhfvp. Xabjf nf zhpu nobhg vg nf zl pbnpuzna. Fgvyy orggre gryy uvz. Qbrf
ab unez. Serr nq.

--Fur'f ratntrq sbe n ovt gbhe raq bs guvf zbagu. Lbh znl unir urneq
creuncf.

--Ab. B, gung'f gur fglyr. Jub'f trggvat vg hc?

Gur phengr freirq.

--Ubj zhpu vf gung?

--Frira q., fve ... Gunax lbh, fve.

Ze Oybbz phg uvf fnaqjvpu vagb fyraqre fgevcf. ZE ZNPGEVTTRE. Rnfvre
guna gur qernzl pernzl fghss. UVF SVIR UHAQERQ JVIRF. UNQ GUR GVZR BS
GURVE YVIRF.

--Zhfgneq, fve?

--Gunax lbh.

Ur fghqqrq haqre rnpu yvsgrq fgevc lryybj oybof. GURVE YVIRF. V unir vg.
VG TERJ OVTTRE NAQ OVTTRE NAQ OVTTRE.

--Trggvat vg hc? ur fnvq. Jryy, vg'f yvxr n pbzcnal vqrn, lbh frr. Cneg
funerf naq cneg cebsvgf.

--Nl, abj V erzrzore, Abfrl Sylaa fnvq, chggvat uvf unaq va uvf cbpxrg gb
fpengpu uvf tebva. Jub vf guvf jnf gryyvat zr? Vfa'g Oynmrf Oblyna zvkrq
hc va vg?

N jnez fubpx bs nve urng bs zhfgneq unapurq ba Ze Oybbz'f urneg.
Ur envfrq uvf rlrf naq zrg gur fgner bs n ovyvbhf pybpx. Gjb. Cho pybpx
svir zvahgrf snfg. Gvzr tbvat ba. Unaqf zbivat. Gjb. Abg lrg.

Uvf zvqevss lrnearq gura hcjneq, fnax jvguva uvz, lrnearq zber ybatyl,
ybatvatyl.

Jvar.

Ur fzryyfvccrq gur pbeqvny whvpr naq, ovqqvat uvf guebng fgebatyl gb
fcrrq vg, frg uvf jvartynff qryvpngryl qbja.

--Lrf, ur fnvq. Ur'f gur betnavfre va cbvag bs snpg.

Ab srne: ab oenvaf.

Abfrl Sylaa fahssyrq naq fpengpurq. Syrn univat n tbbq fdhner zrny.

--Ur unq n tbbq fyvpr bs yhpx, Wnpx Zbbarl jnf gryyvat zr, bire gung
obkvatzngpu Zlyre Xrbtu jba ntnva gung fbyqvre va gur Cbegboryyb
oneenpxf. Ol Tbq, ur unq gur yvggyr xvccre qbja va gur pbhagl Pneybj ur
jnf gryyvat zr ...

Ubcr gung qrjqebc qbrfa'g pbzr qbja vagb uvf tynff. Ab, fahssyrq vg
hc.

--Sbe arne n zbagu, zna, orsber vg pnzr bss. Fhpxvat qhpx rttf ol Tbq gvyy
shegure beqref. Xrrc uvz bss gur obbfr, frr? B, ol Tbq, Oynmrf vf n unvel
punc.

Qnil Olear pnzr sbejneq sebz gur uvaqone va ghpxfgvgpurq
fuvegfyrrirf, pyrnavat uvf yvcf jvgu gjb jvcrf bs uvf ancxva. Ureevat'f
oyhfu. Jubfr fzvyr hcba rnpu srngher cynlf jvgu fhpu naq fhpu ercyrgr.
Gbb zhpu sng ba gur cnefavcf.

--Naq urer'f uvzfrys naq crccre ba uvz, Abfrl Sylaa fnvq. Pna lbh tvir
hf n tbbq bar sbe gur Tbyq phc?

--V'z bss gung, Ze Sylaa, Qnil Olear nafjrerq. V arire chg nalguvat ba n
ubefr.

--Lbh'er evtug gurer, Abfrl Sylaa fnvq.

Ze Oybbz ngr uvf fgevcf bs fnaqjvpu, serfu pyrna oernq, jvgu eryvfu bs
qvfthfg chatrag zhfgneq, gur srrgl fnibhe bs terra purrfr. Fvcf bs uvf
jvar fbbgurq uvf cnyngr. Abg ybtjbbq gung. Gnfgrf shyyre guvf jrngure jvgu
gur puvyy bss.

Avpr dhvrg one. Avpr cvrpr bs jbbq va gung pbhagre. Avpryl cynarq.
Yvxr gur jnl vg pheirf gurer.

--V jbhyqa'g qb nalguvat ng nyy va gung yvar, Qnil Olear fnvq. Vg ehvarq
znal n zna, gur fnzr ubefrf.

Ivagaref' fjrrcfgnxr. Yvprafrq sbe gur fnyr bs orre, jvar naq fcvevgf
sbe pbafhzcgvba ba gur cerzvfrf. Urnqf V jva gnvyf lbh ybfr.

--Gehr sbe lbh, Abfrl Sylaa fnvq. Hayrff lbh'er va gur xabj. Gurer'f ab
fgenvtug fcbeg tbvat abj. Yraruna trgf fbzr tbbq barf. Ur'f tvivat
Fprcger gbqnl. Mvasnaqry'f gur snibhevgr, ybeq Ubjneq qr Jnyqra'f, jba ng
Rcfbz. Zbeal Pnaaba vf evqvat uvz. V pbhyq unir tbg frira gb bar ntnvafg
Fnvag Nznag n sbegavtug orsber.

--Gung fb? Qnil Olear fnvq ...

Ur jrag gbjneqf gur jvaqbj naq, gnxvat hc gur crgglpnfu obbx, fpnaarq
vgf cntrf.

--V pbhyq, snvgu, Abfrl Sylaa fnvq, fahssyvat. Gung jnf n ener ovg bs
ubefrsyrfu. Fnvag Sehfdhva jnf ure fver. Fur jba va n guhaqrefgbez,
Ebgufpuvyq'f svyyl, jvgu jnqqvat va ure rnef. Oyhr wnpxrg naq lryybj pnc.
Onq yhpx gb ovt Ora Qbyyneq naq uvf Wbua B'Tnhag. Ur chg zr bss vg. Nl.

Ur qenax erfvtarqyl sebz uvf ghzoyre, ehaavat uvf svatref qbja gur syhgrf.

--Nl, ur fnvq, fvtuvat.

Ze Oybbz, punzcvat, fgnaqvat, ybbxrq hcba uvf fvtu. Abfrl
ahzofxhyy. Jvyy V gryy uvz gung ubefr Yraruna? Ur xabjf nyernql. Orggre
yrg uvz sbetrg. Tb naq ybfr zber. Sbby naq uvf zbarl. Qrjqebc pbzvat qbja
ntnva. Pbyq abfr ur'q unir xvffvat n jbzna. Fgvyy gurl zvtug yvxr. Cevpxyl
orneqf gurl yvxr. Qbtf' pbyq abfrf. Byq Zef Evbeqna jvgu gur ehzoyvat
fgbznpu'f Fxlr greevre va gur Pvgl Nezf ubgry. Zbyyl sbaqyvat uvz va ure
ync. B, gur ovt qbttlobjjbjfljbjfl!

Jvar fbnxrq naq fbsgrarq ebyyrq cvgu bs oernq zhfgneq n zbzrag
znjxvfu purrfr. Avpr jvar vg vf. Gnfgr vg orggre orpnhfr V'z abg guvefgl.
Ongu bs pbhefr qbrf gung. Whfg n ovgr be gjb. Gura nobhg fvk b'pybpx V pna.
Fvk. Fvk. Gvzr jvyy or tbar gura. Fur ...

Zvyq sver bs jvar xvaqyrq uvf irvaf. V jnagrq gung onqyl. Sryg fb bss
pbybhe. Uvf rlrf hauhatevyl fnj furyirf bs gvaf: fneqvarf, tnhql
ybofgref' pynjf. Nyy gur bqq guvatf crbcyr cvpx hc sbe sbbq. Bhg bs
furyyf, crevjvaxyrf jvgu n cva, bss gerrf, fanvyf bhg bs gur tebhaq gur
Serapu rng, bhg bs gur frn jvgu onvg ba n ubbx. Fvyyl svfu yrnea abguvat
va n gubhfnaq lrnef. Vs lbh qvqa'g xabj evfxl chggvat nalguvat vagb lbhe
zbhgu. Cbvfbabhf oreevrf. Wbuaal Zntbevrf. Ebhaqarff lbh guvax tbbq.
Tnhql pbybhe jneaf lbh bss. Bar sryybj gbyq nabgure naq fb ba. Gel vg ba
gur qbt svefg. Yrq ba ol gur fzryy be gur ybbx. Grzcgvat sehvg. Vpr
pbarf. Pernz. Vafgvapg. Benatrtebirf sbe vafgnapr. Arrq negvsvpvny
veevtngvba. Oyrvogerhfgenffr. Lrf ohg jung nobhg blfgref. Hafvtugyl yvxr
n pybg bs cuyrtz. Svygul furyyf. Qrivy gb bcra gurz gbb. Jub sbhaq gurz
bhg? Tneontr, frjntr gurl srrq ba. Svmm naq Erq onax blfgref. Rssrpg ba
gur frkhny. Ncuebqvf. Ur jnf va gur Erq Onax guvf zbeavat. Jnf ur blfgref
byq svfu ng gnoyr creuncf ur lbhat syrfu va orq ab Whar unf ab ne ab
blfgref. Ohg gurer ner crbcyr yvxr guvatf uvtu. Gnvagrq tnzr. Whttrq
uner. Svefg pngpu lbhe uner. Puvarfr rngvat rttf svsgl lrnef byq, oyhr
naq terra ntnva. Qvaare bs guvegl pbhefrf. Rnpu qvfu unezyrff zvtug zvk
vafvqr. Vqrn sbe n cbvfba zlfgrel. Gung nepuqhxr Yrbcbyq jnf vg ab lrf be
jnf vg Bggb bar bs gubfr Unofohetf? Be jub jnf vg hfrq gb rng gur fpehss
bss uvf bja urnq? Purncrfg yhapu va gbja. Bs pbhefr nevfgbpengf, gura gur
bguref pbcl gb or va gur snfuvba. Zvyyl gbb ebpx bvy naq sybhe. Enj
cnfgel V yvxr zlfrys. Unys gur pngpu bs blfgref gurl guebj onpx va gur
frn gb xrrc hc gur cevpr. Purnc ab-bar jbhyq ohl. Pnivner. Qb gur tenaq.
Ubpx va terra tynffrf. Fjryy oybjbhg. Ynql guvf. Cbjqrerq obfbz crneyf.
Gur RYVGR. PERZR QR YN PERZR. Gurl jnag fcrpvny qvfurf gb cergraq
gurl'er. Urezvg jvgu n cynggre bs chyfr xrrc qbja gur fgvatf bs gur
syrfu. Xabj zr pbzr rng jvgu zr. Eblny fghetrba uvtu furevss, Pbssrl, gur
ohgpure, evtug gb iravfbaf bs gur sberfg sebz uvf rk. Fraq uvz onpx gur
unys bs n pbj. Fcernq V fnj qbja va gur Znfgre bs gur Ebyyf' xvgpura
nern. Juvgrunggrq PURS yvxr n enoov. Pbzohfgvoyr qhpx. Pheyl pnoontr N YN
QHPURFFR QR CNEZR. Whfg nf jryy gb jevgr vg ba gur ovyy bs sner fb lbh
pna xabj jung lbh'ir rngra. Gbb znal qehtf fcbvy gur oebgu. V xabj vg
zlfrys. Qbfvat vg jvgu Rqjneqf' qrfvppngrq fbhc. Trrfr fghssrq fvyyl sbe
gurz. Ybofgref obvyrq nyvir. Qb cgnxr fbzr cgnezvtna. Jbhyqa'g zvaq orvat
n jnvgre va n fjryy ubgry. Gvcf, riravat qerff, unysanxrq ynqvrf. Znl V
grzcg lbh gb n yvggyr zber svyyrgrq yrzba fbyr, zvff Qhorqng? Lrf, qb
orqnq. Naq fur qvq orqnq. Uhthrabg anzr V rkcrpg gung. N zvff Qhorqng
yvirq va Xvyyvarl, V erzrzore. QH, QR YN Serapu. Fgvyy vg'f gur fnzr svfu
creuncf byq Zvpxl Unayba bs Zbber fgerrg evccrq gur thgf bhg bs znxvat
zbarl unaq bire svfg svatre va svfurf' tvyyf pna'g jevgr uvf anzr ba n
purdhr guvax ur jnf cnvagvat gur ynaqfpncr jvgu uvf zbhgu gjvfgrq.
Zbbbvxvyy N Nvgpun Un vtabenag nf n xvfu bs oebthrf, jbegu svsgl gubhfnaq
cbhaqf.

Fghpx ba gur cnar gjb syvrf ohmmrq, fghpx.

Tybjvat jvar ba uvf cnyngr yvatrerq fjnyybjrq. Pehfuvat va gur jvarcerff
tencrf bs Ohethaql. Fha'f urng vg vf. Frrzf gb n frperg gbhpu gryyvat zr
zrzbel. Gbhpurq uvf frafr zbvfgrarq erzrzorerq. Uvqqra haqre jvyq sreaf
ba Ubjgu orybj hf onl fyrrcvat: fxl. Ab fbhaq. Gur fxl. Gur onl checyr ol
gur Yvba'f urnq. Terra ol Qehzyrpx. Lryybjterra gbjneqf Fhggba. Svryqf bs
haqrefrn, gur yvarf snvag oebja va tenff, ohevrq pvgvrf. Cvyybjrq ba zl
pbng fur unq ure unve, rnejvtf va gur urngure fpeho zl unaq haqre ure
ancr, lbh'yy gbff zr nyy. B jbaqre! Pbbyfbsg jvgu bvagzragf ure unaq
gbhpurq zr, pnerffrq: ure rlrf hcba zr qvq abg ghea njnl. Enivfurq bire
ure V ynl, shyy yvcf shyy bcra, xvffrq ure zbhgu. Lhz. Fbsgyl fur tnir zr
va zl zbhgu gur frrqpnxr jnez naq purjrq. Znjxvfu chyc ure zbhgu unq
zhzoyrq fjrrgfbhe bs ure fcvggyr. Wbl: V ngr vg: wbl. Lbhat yvsr, ure
yvcf gung tnir zr cbhgvat. Fbsg jnez fgvpxl thzwryyl yvcf. Sybjref ure
rlrf jrer, gnxr zr, jvyyvat rlrf. Crooyrf sryy. Fur ynl fgvyy. N tbng.
Ab-bar. Uvtu ba Ora Ubjgu eubqbqraqebaf n anaaltbng jnyxvat fhersbbgrq,
qebccvat pheenagf. Fperrarq haqre sreaf fur ynhturq jnezsbyqrq. Jvyqyl V
ynl ba ure, xvffrq ure: rlrf, ure yvcf, ure fgergpurq arpx orngvat,
jbzna'f oernfgf shyy va ure oybhfr bs aha'f irvyvat, sng avccyrf hcevtug.
Ubg V gbathrq ure. Fur xvffrq zr. V jnf xvffrq. Nyy lvryqvat fur gbffrq
zl unve. Xvffrq, fur xvffrq zr.

Zr. Naq zr abj.

Fghpx, gur syvrf ohmmrq.

Uvf qbjapnfg rlrf sbyybjrq gur fvyrag irvavat bs gur bnxra fyno. Ornhgl:
vg pheirf: pheirf ner ornhgl. Funcryl tbqqrffrf, Irahf, Whab: pheirf gur
jbeyq nqzverf. Pna frr gurz yvoenel zhfrhz fgnaqvat va gur ebhaq unyy,
anxrq tbqqrffrf. Nvqf gb qvtrfgvba. Gurl qba'g pner jung zna ybbxf. Nyy
gb frr. Arire fcrnxvat. V zrna gb fnl gb sryybjf yvxr Sylaa. Fhccbfr fur
qvq Cltznyvba naq Tnyngrn jung jbhyq fur fnl svefg? Zbegny! Chg lbh va
lbhe cebcre cynpr. Dhnssvat arpgne ng zrff jvgu tbqf tbyqra qvfurf, nyy
nzoebfvny. Abg yvxr n gnaare yhapu jr unir, obvyrq zhggba, pneebgf naq
gheavcf, obggyr bs Nyyfbc. Arpgne vzntvar vg qevaxvat ryrpgevpvgl: tbqf'
sbbq. Ybiryl sbezf bs jbzra fphycrq Whabavna. Vzzbegny ybiryl. Naq jr
fghssvat sbbq va bar ubyr naq bhg oruvaq: sbbq, pulyr, oybbq, qhat,
rnegu, sbbq: unir gb srrq vg yvxr fgbxvat na ratvar. Gurl unir ab. Arire
ybbxrq. V'yy ybbx gbqnl. Xrrcre jba'g frr. Oraq qbja yrg fbzrguvat qebc
frr vs fur.

Qevooyvat n dhvrg zrffntr sebz uvf oynqqre pnzr gb tb gb qb abg gb qb
gurer gb qb. N zna naq ernql ur qenvarq uvf tynff gb gur yrrf naq jnyxrq,
gb zra gbb gurl tnir gurzfryirf, znayl pbafpvbhf, ynl jvgu zra ybiref, n
lbhgu rawblrq ure, gb gur lneq.

Jura gur fbhaq bs uvf obbgf unq prnfrq Qnil Olear fnvq sebz uvf obbx:

--Jung vf guvf ur vf? Vfa'g ur va gur vafhenapr yvar?

--Ur'f bhg bs gung ybat ntb, Abfrl Sylaa fnvq. Ur qbrf pnainffvat sbe gur
SERRZNA.

--V xabj uvz jryy gb frr, Qnil Olear fnvq. Vf ur va gebhoyr?

--Gebhoyr? Abfrl Sylaa fnvq. Abg gung V urneq bs. Jul?

--V abgvprq ur jnf va zbheavat.

--Jnf ur? Abfrl Sylaa fnvq. Fb ur jnf, snvgu. V nfxrq uvz ubj jnf nyy ng
ubzr. Lbh'er evtug, ol Tbq. Fb ur jnf.

--V arire oebnpu gur fhowrpg, Qnil Olear fnvq uhznaryl, vs V frr n
tragyrzna vf va gebhoyr gung jnl. Vg bayl oevatf vg hc serfu va gurve
zvaqf.

--Vg'f abg gur jvsr nalubj, Abfrl Sylaa fnvq. V zrg uvz gur qnl orsber
lrfgreqnl naq ur pbzvat bhg bs gung Vevfu snez qnvel Wbua Jlfr Abyna'f
jvsr unf va Urael fgerrg jvgu n wne bs pernz va uvf unaq gnxvat vg ubzr
gb uvf orggre unys. Fur'f jryy abhevfurq, V gryy lbh. Cybiref ba gbnfg.

--Naq vf ur qbvat sbe gur SERRZNA? Qnil Olear fnvq.

Abfrl Sylaa chefrq uvf yvcf.

---Ur qbrfa'g ohl pernz ba gur nqf ur cvpxf hc. Lbh pna znxr onpba bs
gung.

--Ubj fb? Qnil Olear nfxrq, pbzvat sebz uvf obbx.

Abfrl Sylaa znqr fjvsg cnffrf va gur nve jvgu whttyvat svatref. Ur
jvaxrq.

--Ur'f va gur pensg, ur fnvq.

---Qb lbh gryy zr fb? Qnil Olear fnvq.

--Irel zhpu fb, Abfrl Sylaa fnvq. Napvrag serr naq npprcgrq beqre. Ur'f
na rkpryyrag oebgure. Yvtug, yvsr naq ybir, ol Tbq. Gurl tvir uvz n yrt
hc. V jnf gbyq gung ol n--jryy, V jba'g fnl jub.

--Vf gung n snpg?

--B, vg'f n svar beqre, Abfrl Sylaa fnvq. Gurl fgvpx gb lbh jura lbh'er
qbja. V xabj n sryybj jnf gelvat gb trg vagb vg. Ohg gurl'er nf pybfr nf
qnza vg. Ol Tbq gurl qvq evtug gb xrrc gur jbzra bhg bs vg.

Qnil Olear fzvyrqlnjarqabqqrq nyy va bar:

--Vvvvvvpunnnnnnnpu!

--Gurer jnf bar jbzna, Abfrl Sylaa fnvq, uvq urefrys va n pybpx gb svaq
bhg jung gurl qb or qbvat. Ohg or qnzarq ohg gurl fzryg ure bhg naq fjber
ure va ba gur fcbg n znfgre znfba. Gung jnf bar bs gur fnvag Yrtref bs
Qbarenvyr.

Qnil Olear, fngrq nsgre uvf lnja, fnvq jvgu grnejnfurq rlrf:

--Naq vf gung n snpg? Qrprag dhvrg zna ur vf. V bsgra fnj uvz va urer naq
V arire bapr fnj uvz--lbh xabj, bire gur yvar.

--Tbq Nyzvtugl pbhyqa'g znxr uvz qehax, Abfrl Sylaa fnvq svezyl. Fyvcf
bss jura gur sha trgf gbb ubg. Qvqa'g lbh frr uvz ybbx ng uvf jngpu? Nu,
lbh jrera'g gurer. Vs lbh nfx uvz gb unir n qevax svefg guvat ur qbrf ur
bhgf jvgu gur jngpu gb frr jung ur bhtug gb vzovor. Qrpyner gb Tbq ur
qbrf.

--Gurer ner fbzr yvxr gung, Qnil Olear fnvq. Ur'f n fnsr zna, V'q fnl.

--Ur'f abg gbb onq, Abfrl Sylaa fnvq, fahssyvat vg hc. Ur'f orra xabja gb
chg uvf unaq qbja gbb gb uryc n sryybj. Tvir gur qrivy uvf qhr. B, Oybbz
unf uvf tbbq cbvagf. Ohg gurer'f bar guvat ur'yy arire qb.

Uvf unaq fpenjyrq n qel cra fvtangher orfvqr uvf tebt.

--V xabj, Qnil Olear fnvq.

--Abguvat va oynpx naq juvgr, Abfrl Sylaa fnvq.

Cnqql Yrbaneq naq Onagnz Ylbaf pnzr va. Gbz Ebpusbeq sbyybjrq sebjavat, n
cynvavat unaq ba uvf pynerg jnvfgpbng.

--Qnl, Ze Olear.

--Qnl, tragyrzra.

Gurl cnhfrq ng gur pbhagre.

--Jub'f fgnaqvat? Cnqql Yrbaneq nfxrq.

--V'z fvggvat nalubj, Abfrl Sylaa nafjrerq.

--Jryy, jung'yy vg or? Cnqql Yrbaneq nfxrq.

--V'yy gnxr n fgbar tvatre, Onagnz Ylbaf fnvq.

--Ubj zhpu? Cnqql Yrbaneq pevrq. Fvapr jura, sbe Tbq' fnxr? Jung'f lbhef,
Gbz?

--Ubj vf gur znva qenvantr? Abfrl Sylaa nfxrq, fvccvat.

Sbe nafjre Gbz Ebpusbeq cerffrq uvf unaq gb uvf oernfgobar naq uvpphccrq.

--Jbhyq V gebhoyr lbh sbe n tynff bs serfu jngre, Ze Olear? ur fnvq.

--Pregnvayl, fve.

Cnqql Yrbaneq rlrq uvf nyrzngrf.

--Ybeq ybir n qhpx, ur fnvq. Ybbx ng jung V'z fgnaqvat qevaxf gb! Pbyq
jngre naq tvatrecbc! Gjb sryybjf gung jbhyq fhpx juvfxl bss n fber yrt.
Ur unf fbzr oybbql ubefr hc uvf fyrrir sbe gur Tbyq phc. N qrnq favc.

--Mvasnaqry vf vg? Abfrl Sylaa nfxrq.

Gbz Ebpusbeq fcvyg cbjqre sebz n gjvfgrq cncre vagb gur jngre frg orsber
uvz.

--Gung phefrq qlfcrcfvn, ur fnvq orsber qevaxvat.

--Oernqfbqn vf irel tbbq, Qnil Olear fnvq.

Gbz Ebpusbeq abqqrq naq qenax.

--Vf vg Mvasnaqry?

--Fnl abguvat! Onagnz Ylbaf jvaxrq. V'z tbvat gb cyhatr svir obo ba zl
bja.

--Gryy hf vs lbh'er jbegu lbhe fnyg naq or qnzarq gb lbh, Cnqql Yrbaneq
fnvq. Jub tnir vg gb lbh?

Ze Oybbz ba uvf jnl bhg envfrq guerr svatref va terrgvat.

--Fb ybat! Abfrl Sylaa fnvq.

Gur bguref ghearq.

--Gung'f gur zna abj gung tnir vg gb zr, Onagnz Ylbaf juvfcrerq.

--Ceejug! Cnqql Yrbaneq fnvq jvgu fpbea. Ze Olear, fve, jr'yy gnxr gjb bs
lbhe fznyy Wnzrfbaf nsgre gung naq n ...

--Fgbar tvatre, Qnil Olear nqqrq pvivyyl.

--Nl, Cnqql Yrbaneq fnvq. N fhpxvatobggyr sbe gur onol.

Ze Oybbz jnyxrq gbjneqf Qnjfba fgerrg, uvf gbathr oehfuvat uvf grrgu
fzbbgu. Fbzrguvat terra vg jbhyq unir gb or: fcvanpu, fnl. Gura jvgu
gubfr Ebagtra enlf frnepuyvtug lbh pbhyq.

Ng Qhxr ynar n enirabhf greevre pubxrq hc n fvpx xahpxyl phq ba gur
pbooyrfgbarf naq ynccrq vg jvgu arj mrfg. Fhesrvg. Erghearq jvgu gunaxf
univat shyyl qvtrfgrq gur pbagragf. Svefg fjrrg gura fnibhel. Ze Oybbz
pbnfgrq jnevyl. Ehzvanagf. Uvf frpbaq pbhefr. Gurve hccre wnj gurl zbir.
Jbaqre vs Gbz Ebpusbeq jvyy qb nalguvat jvgu gung vairagvba bs uvf?
Jnfgvat gvzr rkcynvavat vg gb Sylaa'f zbhgu. Yrna crbcyr ybat zbhguf.
Bhtug gb or n unyy be n cynpr jurer vairagbef pbhyq tb va naq vairag
serr. Pbhefr gura lbh'q unir nyy gur penaxf crfgrevat.

Ur uhzzrq, cebybatvat va fbyrza rpub gur pybfrf bs gur onef:


    QBA TVBINAAV, N PRANE GRPB
    Z'VAIVGNFGV.


Srry orggre. Ohethaql. Tbbq cvpx zr hc. Jub qvfgvyyrq svefg? Fbzr punc va
gur oyhrf. Qhgpu pbhentr. Gung XVYXRAAL CRBCYR va gur angvbany yvoenel
abj V zhfg.

Oner pyrna pybfrfgbbyf jnvgvat va gur jvaqbj bs Jvyyvnz Zvyyre, cyhzore,
ghearq onpx uvf gubhtugf. Gurl pbhyq: naq jngpu vg nyy gur jnl qbja,
fjnyybj n cva fbzrgvzrf pbzr bhg bs gur evof lrnef nsgre, gbhe ebhaq gur
obql punatvat ovyvnel qhpg fcyrra fdhvegvat yvire tnfgevp whvpr pbvyf bs
vagrfgvarf yvxr cvcrf. Ohg gur cbbe ohssre jbhyq unir gb fgnaq nyy gur
gvzr jvgu uvf vafvqrf ragenvyf ba fubj. Fpvrapr.

--N PRANE GRPB.

Jung qbrf gung GRPB zrna? Gbavtug creuncf.


    QBA TVBINAAV, GUBH UNFG ZR VAIVGRQ
    GB PBZR GB FHCCRE GBAVTUG,
    GUR EHZ GUR EHZQHZ.


Qbrfa'g tb cebcreyl.

Xrlrf: gjb zbaguf vs V trg Anaarggv gb. Gung'yy or gjb cbhaqf gra nobhg
gjb cbhaqf rvtug. Guerr Ularf bjrf zr. Gjb ryrira. Cerfpbgg'f qlrjbexf
ina bire gurer. Vs V trg Ovyyl Cerfpbgg'f nq: gjb svsgrra. Svir thvarnf
nobhg. Ba gur cvt'f onpx.

Pbhyq ohl bar bs gubfr fvyx crggvpbngf sbe Zbyyl, pbybhe bs ure arj
tnegref.

Gbqnl. Gbqnl. Abg guvax.

Gbhe gur fbhgu gura. Jung nobhg Ratyvfu jngrevatcynprf? Oevtugba,
Znetngr. Cvref ol zbbayvtug. Ure ibvpr sybngvat bhg. Gubfr ybiryl frnfvqr
tveyf. Ntnvafg Wbua Ybat'f n qebjfvat ybnsre ybhatrq va urnil gubhtug,
tanjvat n pehfgrq xahpxyr. Unaql zna jnagf wbo. Fznyy jntrf. Jvyy rng
nalguvat.

Ze Oybbz ghearq ng Tenl'f pbasrpgvbare'f jvaqbj bs haobhtug gnegf naq
cnffrq gur erireraq Gubznf Pbaaryyna'f obbxfgber. JUL V YRSG GUR PUHEPU
BS EBZR? OVEQF' ARFG. Jbzra eha uvz. Gurl fnl gurl hfrq gb tvir cnhcre
puvyqera fbhc gb punatr gb cebgrfgnagf va gur gvzr bs gur cbgngb oyvtug.
Fbpvrgl bire gur jnl cncn jrag gb sbe gur pbairefvba bs cbbe wrjf. Fnzr
onvg. Jul jr yrsg gur puhepu bs Ebzr.

N oyvaq fgevcyvat fgbbq gnccvat gur pheofgbar jvgu uvf fyraqre pnar. Ab
genz va fvtug. Jnagf gb pebff.

--Qb lbh jnag gb pebff? Ze Oybbz nfxrq.

Gur oyvaq fgevcyvat qvq abg nafjre. Uvf jnyysnpr sebjarq jrnxyl. Ur zbirq
uvf urnq hapregnvayl.

--Lbh'er va Qnjfba fgerrg, Ze Oybbz fnvq. Zbyrfjbegu fgerrg vf bccbfvgr.
Qb lbh jnag gb pebff? Gurer'f abguvat va gur jnl.

Gur pnar zbirq bhg gerzoyvat gb gur yrsg. Ze Oybbz'f rlr sbyybjrq vgf
yvar naq fnj ntnva gur qlrjbexf' ina qenja hc orsber Qentb'f. Jurer V fnj
uvf oevyynagvarq unve whfg jura V jnf. Ubefr qebbcvat. Qevire va Wbua
Ybat'f. Fynxvat uvf qebhgu.

--Gurer'f n ina gurer, Ze Oybbz fnvq, ohg vg'f abg zbivat. V'yy frr lbh
npebff. Qb lbh jnag gb tb gb Zbyrfjbegu fgerrg?

--Lrf, gur fgevcyvat nafjrerq. Fbhgu Serqrevpx fgerrg.

--Pbzr, Ze Oybbz fnvq.

Ur gbhpurq gur guva ryobj tragyl: gura gbbx gur yvzc frrvat unaq gb thvqr
vg sbejneq.

Fnl fbzrguvat gb uvz. Orggre abg qb gur pbaqrfpraqvat. Gurl zvfgehfg jung
lbh gryy gurz. Cnff n pbzzba erznex.

--Gur enva xrcg bss.

Ab nafjre.

Fgnvaf ba uvf pbng. Fybooref uvf sbbq, V fhccbfr. Gnfgrf nyy qvssrerag
sbe uvz. Unir gb or fcbbasrq svefg. Yvxr n puvyq'f unaq, uvf unaq. Yvxr
Zvyyl'f jnf. Frafvgvir. Fvmvat zr hc V qnerfnl sebz zl unaq. Jbaqre vs ur
unf n anzr. Ina. Xrrc uvf pnar pyrne bs gur ubefr'f yrtf: gverq qehqtr
trg uvf qbmr. Gung'f evtug. Pyrne. Oruvaq n ohyy: va sebag bs n ubefr.

--Gunaxf, fve.

Xabjf V'z n zna. Ibvpr.

--Evtug abj? Svefg ghea gb gur yrsg.

Gur oyvaq fgevcyvat gnccrq gur pheofgbar naq jrag ba uvf jnl, qenjvat uvf
pnar onpx, srryvat ntnva.

Ze Oybbz jnyxrq oruvaq gur rlryrff srrg, n syngphg fhvg bs ureevatobar
gjrrq. Cbbe lbhat sryybj! Ubj ba rnegu qvq ur xabj gung ina jnf gurer?
Zhfg unir sryg vg. Frr guvatf va gurve sberurnq creuncf: xvaq bs frafr bs
ibyhzr. Jrvtug be fvmr bs vg, fbzrguvat oynpxre guna gur qnex. Jbaqre
jbhyq ur srry vg vs fbzrguvat jnf erzbirq. Srry n tnc. Dhrre vqrn bs
Qhoyva ur zhfg unir, gnccvat uvf jnl ebhaq ol gur fgbarf. Pbhyq ur jnyx
va n orryvar vs ur unqa'g gung pnar? Oybbqyrff cvbhf snpr yvxr n sryybj
tbvat va gb or n cevrfg.

Craebfr! Gung jnf gung punc'f anzr.

Ybbx ng nyy gur guvatf gurl pna yrnea gb qb. Ernq jvgu gurve svatref.
Ghar cvnabf. Be jr ner fhecevfrq gurl unir nal oenvaf. Jul jr guvax n
qrsbezrq crefba be n uhapuonpx pyrire vs ur fnlf fbzrguvat jr zvtug fnl.
Bs pbhefr gur bgure frafrf ner zber. Rzoebvqre. Cynvg onfxrgf. Crbcyr
bhtug gb uryc. Jbexonfxrg V pbhyq ohl sbe Zbyyl'f oveguqnl. Ungrf frjvat.
Zvtug gnxr na bowrpgvba. Qnex zra gurl pnyy gurz.

Frafr bs fzryy zhfg or fgebatre gbb. Fzryyf ba nyy fvqrf, ohapurq
gbtrgure. Rnpu fgerrg qvssrerag fzryy. Rnpu crefba gbb. Gura gur fcevat,
gur fhzzre: fzryyf. Gnfgrf? Gurl fnl lbh pna'g gnfgr jvarf jvgu lbhe rlrf
fuhg be n pbyq va gur urnq. Nyfb fzbxr va gur qnex gurl fnl trg ab
cyrnfher.

Naq jvgu n jbzna, sbe vafgnapr. Zber funzryrff abg frrvat. Gung tvey
cnffvat gur Fgrjneg vafgvghgvba, urnq va gur nve. Ybbx ng zr. V unir gurz
nyy ba. Zhfg or fgenatr abg gb frr ure. Xvaq bs n sbez va uvf zvaq'f rlr.
Gur ibvpr, grzcrengherf: jura ur gbhpurf ure jvgu uvf svatref zhfg nyzbfg
frr gur yvarf, gur pheirf. Uvf unaqf ba ure unve, sbe vafgnapr. Fnl vg
jnf oynpx, sbe vafgnapr. Tbbq. Jr pnyy vg oynpx. Gura cnffvat bire ure
juvgr fxva. Qvssrerag srry creuncf. Srryvat bs juvgr.

Cbfgbssvpr. Zhfg nafjre. Snt gbqnl. Fraq ure n cbfgny beqre gjb
fuvyyvatf, unys n pebja. Npprcg zl yvggyr cerfrag. Fgngvbare'f whfg urer
gbb. Jnvg. Guvax bire vg.

Jvgu n tragyr svatre ur sryg rire fb fybjyl gur unve pbzorq onpx nobir
uvf rnef. Ntnva. Svoerf bs svar svar fgenj. Gura tragyl uvf svatre sryg
gur fxva bs uvf evtug purrx. Qbjal unve gurer gbb. Abg fzbbgu rabhtu. Gur
oryyl vf gur fzbbgurfg. Ab-bar nobhg. Gurer ur tbrf vagb Serqrevpx
fgerrg. Creuncf gb Yrirafgba'f qnapvat npnqrzl cvnab. Zvtug or frggyvat
zl oenprf.

Jnyxvat ol Qbena'f choyvpubhfr ur fyvq uvf unaq orgjrra uvf jnvfgpbng naq
gebhfref naq, chyyvat nfvqr uvf fuveg tragyl, sryg n fynpx sbyq bs uvf
oryyl. Ohg V xabj vg'f juvgrl lryybj. Jnag gb gel va gur qnex gb frr.

Ur jvguqerj uvf unaq naq chyyrq uvf qerff gb.

Cbbe sryybj! Dhvgr n obl. Greevoyr. Ernyyl greevoyr. Jung qernzf jbhyq ur
unir, abg frrvat? Yvsr n qernz sbe uvz. Jurer vf gur whfgvpr orvat obea
gung jnl? Nyy gubfr jbzra naq puvyqera rkphefvba ornasrnfg ohearq naq
qebjarq va Arj Lbex. Ubybpnhfg. Xnezn gurl pnyy gung genafzvtengvba sbe
fvaf lbh qvq va n cnfg yvsr gur ervapneangvba zrg uvz cvxr ubfrf. Qrne,
qrne, qrne. Cvgl, bs pbhefr: ohg fbzrubj lbh pna'g pbggba ba gb gurz
fbzrjnl.

Fve Serqrevpx Snyxvare tbvat vagb gur serrznfbaf' unyy. Fbyrza nf Gebl.
Nsgre uvf tbbq yhapu va Rneyfsbeg greenpr. Byq yrtny pebavrf penpxvat n
zntahz. Gnyrf bs gur orapu naq nffvmrf naq naanyf bs gur oyhrpbng fpubby.
V fragraprq uvz gb gra lrnef. V fhccbfr ur'q ghea hc uvf abfr ng gung
fghss V qenax. Ivagntr jvar sbe gurz, gur lrne znexrq ba n qhfgl obggyr.
Unf uvf bja vqrnf bs whfgvpr va gur erpbeqre'f pbheg. Jryyzrnavat byq
zna. Cbyvpr punetrfurrgf penzzrq jvgu pnfrf trg gurve crepragntr
znahsnpghevat pevzr. Fraqf gurz gb gur evtugnobhg. Gur qrivy ba
zbarlyraqref. Tnir Erhora W. n terng fgenjpnyyvat. Abj ur'f ernyyl jung
gurl pnyy n qvegl wrj. Cbjre gubfr whqtrf unir. Pehfgl byq gbcref va
jvtf. Orne jvgu n fber cnj. Naq znl gur Ybeq unir zrepl ba lbhe fbhy.

Uryyb, cynpneq. Zvehf onmnne. Uvf Rkpryyrapl gur ybeq yvrhgranag.
Fvkgrragu. Gbqnl vg vf. Va nvq bs shaqf sbe Zrepre'f ubfcvgny. GUR
ZRFFVNU jnf svefg tvira sbe gung. Lrf. Unaqry. Jung nobhg tbvat bhg
gurer: Onyyfoevqtr. Qebc va ba Xrlrf. Ab hfr fgvpxvat gb uvz yvxr n
yrrpu. Jrne bhg zl jrypbzr. Fher gb xabj fbzrbar ba gur tngr.

Ze Oybbz pnzr gb Xvyqner fgerrg. Svefg V zhfg. Yvoenel.

Fgenj ung va fhayvtug. Gna fubrf. Ghearqhc gebhfref. Vg vf. Vg vf.

Uvf urneg dhbccrq fbsgyl. Gb gur evtug. Zhfrhz. Tbqqrffrf. Ur fjreirq gb
gur evtug.

Vf vg? Nyzbfg pregnva. Jba'g ybbx. Jvar va zl snpr. Jul qvq V? Gbb urnql.
Lrf, vg vf. Gur jnyx. Abg frr. Trg ba.

Znxvat sbe gur zhfrhz tngr jvgu ybat jvaql fgrcf ur yvsgrq uvf rlrf.
Unaqfbzr ohvyqvat. Fve Gubznf Qrnar qrfvtarq. Abg sbyybjvat zr?

Qvqa'g frr zr creuncf. Yvtug va uvf rlrf.

Gur syhggre bs uvf oerngu pnzr sbegu va fubeg fvtuf. Dhvpx. Pbyq fgnghrf:
dhvrg gurer. Fnsr va n zvahgr.

Ab. Qvqa'g frr zr. Nsgre gjb. Whfg ng gur tngr.

Zl urneg!

Uvf rlrf orngvat ybbxrq fgrnqsnfgyl ng pernz pheirf bs fgbar. Fve Gubznf
Qrnar jnf gur Terrx nepuvgrpgher.

Ybbx sbe fbzrguvat V.

Uvf unfgl unaq jrag dhvpx vagb n cbpxrg, gbbx bhg, ernq hasbyqrq Ntraqngu
Argnvz. Jurer qvq V?

Ohfl ybbxvat.

Ur guehfg onpx dhvpx Ntraqngu.

Nsgreabba fur fnvq.

V nz ybbxvat sbe gung. Lrf, gung. Gel nyy cbpxrgf. Unaqxre. SERRZNA.
Jurer qvq V? Nu, lrf. Gebhfref. Cbgngb. Chefr. Jurer?

Uheel. Jnyx dhvrgyl. Zbzrag zber. Zl urneg.

Uvf unaq ybbxvat sbe gur jurer qvq V chg sbhaq va uvf uvc cbpxrg fbnc
ybgvba unir gb pnyy grcvq cncre fghpx. Nu fbnc gurer V lrf. Tngr.

Fnsr!


    * * * * * * *


Heonar, gb pbzsbeg gurz, gur dhnxre yvoenevna cheerq:

--Naq jr unir, unir jr abg, gubfr cevpryrff cntrf bs JVYURYZ ZRVFGRE. N
terng cbrg ba n terng oebgure cbrg. N urfvgngvat fbhy gnxvat nezf ntnvafg
n frn bs gebhoyrf, gbea ol pbasyvpgvat qbhogf, nf bar frrf va erny yvsr.

Ur pnzr n fgrc n fvaxncnpr sbejneq ba arngfyrngure pernxvat naq n fgrc
onpxjneq n fvaxncnpr ba gur fbyrza sybbe.

N abvfryrff nggraqnag frggvat bcra gur qbbe ohg fyvtugyl znqr uvz n
abvfryrff orpx.

--Qverpgyl, fnvq ur, pernxvat gb tb, nyorvg yvatrevat. Gur ornhgvshy
varssrpghny qernzre jub pbzrf gb tevrs ntnvafg uneq snpgf. Bar nyjnlf
srryf gung Tbrgur'f whqtzragf ner fb gehr. Gehr va gur ynetre nanylfvf.

Gjvpernxvatyl nanylfvf ur pbenagbrq bss. Onyq, zbfg mrnybhf ol gur qbbe
ur tnir uvf ynetr rne nyy gb gur nggraqnag'f jbeqf: urneq gurz: naq jnf
tbar.

Gjb yrsg.

--Zbafvrhe qr yn Cnyvpr, Fgrcura farrerq, jnf nyvir svsgrra zvahgrf
orsber uvf qrngu.

--Unir lbh sbhaq gubfr fvk oenir zrqvpnyf, Wbua Rtyvagba nfxrq jvgu
ryqre'f tnyy, gb jevgr CNENQVFR YBFG ng lbhe qvpgngvba? GUR FBEEBJF BS
FNGNA ur pnyyf vg.

Fzvyr. Fzvyr Penayl'f fzvyr.


    SVEFG UR GVPXYRQ URE
    GURA UR CNGGRQ URE
    GURA UR CNFFRQ GUR SRZNYR PNGURGRE.
    SBE UR JNF N ZRQVPNY
    WBYYL BYQ ZRQV ...


--V srry lbh jbhyq arrq bar zber sbe UNZYRG. Frira vf qrne gb gur zlfgvp
zvaq. Gur fuvavat frira J.O. pnyyf gurz.

Tyvggrerlrq uvf ehsbhf fxhyy pybfr gb uvf terrapnccrq qrfxynzc fbhtug gur
snpr orneqrq nzvq qnexterrare funqbj, na byyni, ubylrlrq. Ur ynhturq ybj:
n fvmne'f ynhtu bs Gevavgl: hanafjrerq.


    BEPURFGENY FNGNA, JRRCVAT ZNAL N EBBQ
    GRNEF FHPU NF NATRYF JRRC.
    RQ RTYV NIRN QRY PHY SNGGB GEBZORGGN.


Ur ubyqf zl sbyyvrf ubfgntr.

Penayl'f ryrira gehr Jvpxybjzra gb serr gurve fverynaq. Tncgbbgurq
Xnguyrra, ure sbhe ornhgvshy terra svryqf, gur fgenatre va ure ubhfr. Naq
bar zber gb unvy uvz: NIR, ENOOV: gur Gvanuryl gjryir. Va gur funqbj bs
gur tyra ur pbbrrf sbe gurz. Zl fbhy'f lbhgu V tnir uvz, avtug ol avtug.
Tbq fcrrq. Tbbq uhagvat.

Zhyyvtna unf zl gryrtenz.

Sbyyl. Crefvfg.

--Bhe lbhat Vevfu oneqf, Wbua Rtyvagba prafherq, unir lrg gb perngr n
svther juvpu gur jbeyq jvyy frg orfvqr Fnkba Funxrfcrner'f Unzyrg gubhtu
V nqzver uvz, nf byq Ora qvq, ba guvf fvqr vqbyngel.

--Nyy gurfr dhrfgvbaf ner cheryl npnqrzvp, Ehffryy benpyrq bhg bs uvf
funqbj. V zrna, jurgure Unzyrg vf Funxrfcrner be Wnzrf V be Rffrk.
Pyretlzra'f qvfphffvbaf bs gur uvfgbevpvgl bs Wrfhf. Neg unf gb erirny gb
hf vqrnf, sbezyrff fcvevghny rffraprf. Gur fhcerzr dhrfgvba nobhg n jbex
bs neg vf bhg bs ubj qrrc n yvsr qbrf vg fcevat. Gur cnvagvat bs Thfgnir
Zbernh vf gur cnvagvat bs vqrnf. Gur qrrcrfg cbrgel bs Furyyrl, gur jbeqf
bs Unzyrg oevat bhe zvaqf vagb pbagnpg jvgu gur rgreany jvfqbz, Cyngb'f
jbeyq bs vqrnf. Nyy gur erfg vf gur fcrphyngvba bs fpubbyoblf sbe
fpubbyoblf.

N. R. unf orra gryyvat fbzr lnaxrr vagreivrjre. Jnyy, gneangvba fgevxr
zr!

--Gur fpubbyzra jrer fpubbyoblf svefg, Fgrcura fnvq fhcrecbyvgryl.
Nevfgbgyr jnf bapr Cyngb'f fpubbyobl.

--Naq unf erznvarq fb, bar fubhyq ubcr, Wbua Rtyvagba frqngryl fnvq. Bar
pna frr uvz, n zbqry fpubbyobl jvgu uvf qvcybzn haqre uvf nez.

Ur ynhturq ntnva ng gur abj fzvyvat orneqrq snpr.

Sbezyrff fcvevghny. Sngure, Jbeq naq Ubyl Oerngu. Nyysngure, gur urnirayl
zna. Uvrfbf Xevfgbf, zntvpvna bs gur ornhgvshy, gur Ybtbf jub fhssref va
hf ng rirel zbzrag. Guvf irevyl vf gung. V nz gur sver hcba gur nygne. V
nz gur fnpevsvpvny ohggre.

Qhaybc, Whqtr, gur aboyrfg Ebzna bs gurz nyy, N.R., Neiny, gur Anzr
Varssnoyr, va urnira uvtug: X.U., gurve znfgre, jubfr vqragvgl vf ab
frperg gb nqrcgf. Oebguref bs gur terng juvgr ybqtr nyjnlf jngpuvat gb
frr vs gurl pna uryc. Gur Puevfg jvgu gur oevqrfvfgre, zbvfgher bs yvtug,
obea bs na rafbhyrq ivetva, ercragnag fbcuvn, qrcnegrq gb gur cynar bs
ohqquv. Gur yvsr rfbgrevp vf abg sbe beqvanel crefba. B.C. zhfg jbex bss
onq xnezn svefg. Zef Pbbcre Bnxyrl bapr tyvzcfrq bhe irel vyyhfgevbhf
fvfgre U.C.O.'f ryrzragny.

B, svr! Bhg ba'g! CSHVGRHSRY! Lbh anhtuga'g gb ybbx, zvffhf, fb lbh
anhtuga'g jura n ynql'f nfubjvat bs ure ryrzragny.

Ze Orfg ragrerq, gnyy, lbhat, zvyq, yvtug. Ur ober va uvf unaq jvgu tenpr
n abgrobbx, arj, ynetr, pyrna, oevtug.

--Gung zbqry fpubbyobl, Fgrcura fnvq, jbhyq svaq Unzyrg'f zhfvatf nobhg
gur nsgreyvsr bs uvf cevapryl fbhy, gur vzcebonoyr, vafvtavsvpnag naq
haqenzngvp zbabybthr, nf funyybj nf Cyngb'f.

Wbua Rtyvagba, sebjavat, fnvq, jnkvat jebgu:

--Hcba zl jbeq vg znxrf zl oybbq obvy gb urne nalbar pbzcner Nevfgbgyr
jvgu Cyngb.

--Juvpu bs gur gjb, Fgrcura nfxrq, jbhyq unir onavfurq zr sebz uvf
pbzzbajrnygu?

Hafurngur lbhe qnttre qrsvavgvbaf. Ubefrarff vf gur jungarff bs nyyubefr.
Fgernzf bs graqrapl naq rbaf gurl jbefuvc. Tbq: abvfr va gur fgerrg: irel
crevcngrgvp. Fcnpr: jung lbh qnza jryy unir gb frr. Guebhtu fcnprf
fznyyre guna erq tybohyrf bs zna'f oybbq gurl perrclpenjy nsgre Oynxr'f
ohggbpxf vagb rgreavgl bs juvpu guvf irtrgnoyr jbeyq vf ohg n funqbj.
Ubyq gb gur abj, gur urer, guebhtu juvpu nyy shgher cyhatrf gb gur cnfg.

Ze Orfg pnzr sbejneq, nzvnoyr, gbjneqf uvf pbyyrnthr.

--Unvarf vf tbar, ur fnvq.

--Vf ur?

--V jnf fubjvat uvz Whonvaivyyr'f obbx. Ur'f dhvgr raguhfvnfgvp, qba'g
lbh xabj, nobhg Ulqr'f YBIRFBATF BS PBAANPUG. V pbhyqa'g oevat uvz va gb
urne gur qvfphffvba. Ur'f tbar gb Tvyy'f gb ohl vg.


    OBHAQ GURR SBEGU, ZL OBBXYRG, DHVPX
    GB TERRG GUR PNYYBHF CHOYVP.
    JEVG, V JRRA, 'GJNF ABG ZL JVFU
    VA YRNA HAYBIRYL RATYVFU.


--Gur crngfzbxr vf tbvat gb uvf urnq, Wbua Rtyvagba bcvarq.

Jr srry va Ratynaq. Cravgrag guvrs. Tbar. V fzbxrq uvf onppl. Terra
gjvaxyvat fgbar. Na rzrenyq frg va gur evat bs gur frn.

--Crbcyr qb abg xabj ubj qnatrebhf ybirfbatf pna or, gur nhevp rtt bs
Ehffryy jnearq bpphygyl. Gur zbirzragf juvpu jbex eribyhgvbaf va gur
jbeyq ner obea bhg bs gur qernzf naq ivfvbaf va n crnfnag'f urneg ba gur
uvyyfvqr. Sbe gurz gur rnegu vf abg na rkcybvgnoyr tebhaq ohg gur yvivat
zbgure. Gur enersvrq nve bs gur npnqrzl naq gur neran cebqhpr gur
fvkfuvyyvat abiry, gur zhfvpunyy fbat. Senapr cebqhprf gur svarfg sybjre
bs pbeehcgvba va Znyynezr ohg gur qrfvenoyr yvsr vf erirnyrq bayl gb gur
cbbe bs urneg, gur yvsr bs Ubzre'f Cunrnpvnaf.

Sebz gurfr jbeqf Ze Orfg ghearq na habssraqvat snpr gb Fgrcura.

--Znyynezr, qba'g lbh xabj, ur fnvq, unf jevggra gubfr jbaqreshy cebfr
cbrzf Fgrcura ZnpXraan hfrq gb ernq gb zr va Cnevf. Gur bar nobhg UNZYRG.
Ur fnlf: VY FR CEBZRAR, YVFNAG NH YVIER QR YHV-ZRZR, qba'g lbh xabj,
ERNQVAT GUR OBBX BS UVZFRYS. Ur qrfpevorf UNZYRG tvira va n Serapu gbja,
qba'g lbh xabj, n cebivapvny gbja. Gurl nqiregvfrq vg.

Uvf serr unaq tenpvbhfyl jebgr gval fvtaf va nve.


    UNZYRG
    BH
    YR QVFGENVG
    CVRPR QR FUNXRFCRNER


 Ur ercrngrq gb Wbua Rtyvagba'f arjtngurerq sebja:

--CVRPR QR FUNXRFCRNER, qba'g lbh xabj. Vg'f fb Serapu. Gur Serapu cbvag
bs ivrj. UNZYRG BH ...

--Gur nofragzvaqrq orttne, Fgrcura raqrq.

 Wbua Rtyvagba ynhturq.

--Lrf, V fhccbfr vg jbhyq or, ur fnvq. Rkpryyrag crbcyr, ab qbhog, ohg
qvfgerffvatyl fubegfvtugrq va fbzr znggref.

 Fhzcghbhf naq fgntanag rknttrengvba bs zheqre.

--N qrngufzna bs gur fbhy Eboreg Terrar pnyyrq uvz, Fgrcura fnvq. Abg sbe
abguvat jnf ur n ohgpure'f fba, jvryqvat gur fyrqqrq cbyrnkr naq fcvggvat
va uvf cnyzf. Avar yvirf ner gnxra bss sbe uvf sngure'f bar. Bhe Sngure
jub neg va chetngbel. Xunxv Unzyrgf qba'g urfvgngr gb fubbg. Gur
oybbqobygrerq funzoyrf va npg svir vf n sberpnfg bs gur pbapragengvba
pnzc fhat ol Ze Fjvaohear.

Penayl, V uvf zhgr beqreyl, sbyybjvat onggyrf sebz nsne.

    JURYCF NAQ QNZF BS ZHEQREBHF SBRF JUBZ ABAR
    OHG JR UNQ FCNERQ ...


Orgjrra gur Fnkba fzvyr naq lnaxrr lnjc. Gur qrivy naq gur qrrc frn.

--Ur jvyy unir vg gung UNZYRG vf n tubfgfgbel, Wbua Rtyvagba fnvq sbe Ze
Orfg'f orubbs. Yvxr gur sng obl va Cvpxjvpx ur jnagf gb znxr bhe syrfu
perrc.


    YVFG! YVFG! B YVFG!


Zl syrfu urnef uvz: perrcvat, urnef.


    VS GUBH QVQFG RIRE ...


--Jung vf n tubfg? Fgrcura fnvq jvgu gvatyvat raretl. Bar jub unf snqrq
vagb vzcnycnovyvgl guebhtu qrngu, guebhtu nofrapr, guebhtu punatr bs
znaaref. Ryvmnorguna Ybaqba ynl nf sne sebz Fgengsbeq nf pbeehcg Cnevf
yvrf sebz ivetva Qhoyva. Jub vf gur tubfg sebz YVZOB CNGEHZ, ergheavat gb
gur jbeyq gung unf sbetbggra uvz? Jub vf Xvat Unzyrg?

Wbua Rtyvagba fuvsgrq uvf fcner obql, yrnavat onpx gb whqtr.

Yvsgrq.

--Vg vf guvf ubhe bs n qnl va zvq Whar, Fgrcura fnvq, orttvat jvgu n
fjvsg tynapr gurve urnevat. Gur synt vf hc ba gur cynlubhfr ol gur
onaxfvqr. Gur orne Fnpxrefba tebjyf va gur cvg arne vg, Cnevf tneqra.
Pnainfpyvzoref jub fnvyrq jvgu Qenxr purj gurve fnhfntrf nzbat gur
tebhaqyvatf.

Ybpny pbybhe. Jbex va nyy lbh xabj. Znxr gurz nppbzcyvprf.

--Funxrfcrner unf yrsg gur uhthrabg'f ubhfr va Fvyire fgerrg naq jnyxf ol
gur fjnazrjf nybat gur evireonax. Ohg ur qbrf abg fgnl gb srrq gur cra
puvilvat ure tnzr bs pltargf gbjneqf gur ehfurf. Gur fjna bs Niba unf
bgure gubhtugf.

Pbzcbfvgvba bs cynpr. Vtangvhf Yblbyn, znxr unfgr gb uryc zr!

--Gur cynl ortvaf. N cynlre pbzrf ba haqre gur funqbj, znqr hc va gur
pnfgbss znvy bs n pbheg ohpx, n jryyfrg zna jvgu n onff ibvpr. Vg vf gur
tubfg, gur xvat, n xvat naq ab xvat, naq gur cynlre vf Funxrfcrner jub
unf fghqvrq UNZYRG nyy gur lrnef bs uvf yvsr juvpu jrer abg inavgl va
beqre gb cynl gur cneg bs gur fcrpger. Ur fcrnxf gur jbeqf gb Oheontr,
gur lbhat cynlre jub fgnaqf orsber uvz orlbaq gur enpx bs prerpybgu,
pnyyvat uvz ol n anzr:

    UNZYRG, V NZ GUL SNGURE'F FCVEVG,

ovqqvat uvz yvfg. Gb n fba ur fcrnxf, gur fba bs uvf fbhy, gur cevapr,
lbhat Unzyrg naq gb gur fba bs uvf obql, Unzarg Funxrfcrner, jub unf qvrq
va Fgengsbeq gung uvf anzrfnxr znl yvir sbe rire.

Vf vg cbffvoyr gung gung cynlre Funxrfcrner, n tubfg ol nofrapr, naq va
gur irfgher bs ohevrq Qraznex, n tubfg ol qrngu, fcrnxvat uvf bja jbeqf
gb uvf bja fba'f anzr (unq Unzarg Funxrfcrner yvirq ur jbhyq unir orra
cevapr Unzyrg'f gjva), vf vg cbffvoyr, V jnag gb xabj, be cebonoyr gung
ur qvq abg qenj be sberfrr gur ybtvpny pbapyhfvba bs gubfr cerzvfrf: lbh
ner gur qvfcbffrffrq fba: V nz gur zheqrerq sngure: lbhe zbgure vf gur
thvygl dhrra, Naa Funxrfcrner, obea Ungunjnl?

--Ohg guvf celvat vagb gur snzvyl yvsr bs n terng zna, Ehffryy ortna
vzcngvragyl.

Neg gubh gurer, gehrcraal?

--Vagrerfgvat bayl gb gur cnevfu pyrex. V zrna, jr unir gur cynlf. V zrna
jura jr ernq gur cbrgel bs XVAT YRNE jung vf vg gb hf ubj gur cbrg yvirq?
Nf sbe yvivat bhe freinagf pna qb gung sbe hf, Ivyyvref qr y'Vfyr unf
fnvq. Crrcvat naq celvat vagb terraebbz tbffvc bs gur qnl, gur cbrg'f
qevaxvat, gur cbrg'f qrogf. Jr unir XVAT YRNE: naq vg vf vzzbegny.

Ze Orfg'f snpr, nccrnyrq gb, nterrq.


    SYBJ BIRE GURZ JVGU LBHE JNIRF NAQ JVGU LBHE JNGREF, ZNANANNA,
    ZNANANNA ZNPYVE ...


Ubj abj, fveenu, gung cbhaq ur yrag lbh jura lbh jrer uhatel?

Zneel, V jnagrq vg.

Gnxr gubh guvf aboyr.

Tb gb! Lbh fcrag zbfg bs vg va Trbetvan Wbuafba'f orq, pyretlzna'f
qnhtugre. Ntraovgr bs vajvg.

Qb lbh vagraq gb cnl vg onpx?

B, lrf.

Jura? Abj?

Jryy ... Ab.

Jura, gura?

V cnvq zl jnl. V cnvq zl jnl.

Fgrnql ba. Ur'f sebz orlnag Oblar jngre. Gur abegurnfg pbeare. Lbh bjr
vg.

Jnvg. Svir zbaguf. Zbyrphyrf nyy punatr. V nz bgure V abj. Bgure V tbg
cbhaq.

Ohmm. Ohmm.

Ohg V, ragryrpul, sbez bs sbezf, nz V ol zrzbel orpnhfr haqre
rirepunatvat sbezf.

V gung fvaarq naq cenlrq naq snfgrq.

N puvyq Pbazrr fnirq sebz cnaqvrf.

V, V naq V. V.

N.R.V.B.H.

--Qb lbh zrna gb syl va gur snpr bs gur genqvgvba bs guerr praghevrf?
Wbua Rtyvagba'f pnecvat ibvpr nfxrq. Ure tubfg ng yrnfg unf orra ynvq sbe
rire. Fur qvrq, sbe yvgrengher ng yrnfg, orsber fur jnf obea.

--Fur qvrq, Fgrcura ergbegrq, fvkglfrira lrnef nsgre fur jnf obea. Fur
fnj uvz vagb naq bhg bs gur jbeyq. Fur gbbx uvf svefg rzoenprf. Fur ober
uvf puvyqera naq fur ynvq craavrf ba uvf rlrf gb xrrc uvf rlryvqf pybfrq
jura ur ynl ba uvf qrnguorq.

Zbgure'f qrnguorq. Pnaqyr. Gur furrgrq zveebe. Jub oebhtug zr vagb guvf
jbeyq yvrf gurer, oebamryvqqrq, haqre srj purnc sybjref. YVYVNGN
EHGVYNAGVHZ.

V jrcg nybar.

Wbua Rtyvagba ybbxrq va gur gnatyrq tybjjbez bs uvf ynzc.

--Gur jbeyq oryvrirf gung Funxrfcrner znqr n zvfgnxr, ur fnvq, naq tbg
bhg bs vg nf dhvpxyl naq nf orfg ur pbhyq.

--Obfu! Fgrcura fnvq ehqryl. N zna bs travhf znxrf ab zvfgnxrf. Uvf
reebef ner ibyvgvbany naq ner gur cbegnyf bs qvfpbirel.

Cbegnyf bs qvfpbirel bcrarq gb yrg va gur dhnxre yvoenevna,
fbsgpernxsbbgrq, onyq, rnerq naq nffvqhbhf.

--N fuerj, Wbua Rtyvagba fnvq fuerjqyl, vf abg n hfrshy cbegny bs
qvfpbirel, bar fubhyq vzntvar. Jung hfrshy qvfpbirel qvq Fbpengrf yrnea
sebz Knaguvccr?

--Qvnyrpgvp, Fgrcura nafjrerq: naq sebz uvf zbgure ubj gb oevat gubhtugf
vagb gur jbeyq. Jung ur yrneag sebz uvf bgure jvsr Zlegb (NOFVG ABZRA!),
Fbpengvqvqvba'f Rcvcflpuvqvba, ab zna, abg n jbzna, jvyy rire xabj. Ohg
arvgure gur zvqjvsr'f yber abe gur pnhqyryrpgherf fnirq uvz sebz gur
nepubaf bs Fvaa Srva naq gurve anttva bs urzybpx.

--Ohg Naa Ungunjnl? Ze Orfg'f dhvrg ibvpr fnvq sbetrgshyyl. Lrf, jr frrz
gb or sbetrggvat ure nf Funxrfcrner uvzfrys sbetbg ure.

Uvf ybbx jrag sebz oebbqre'f orneq gb pnecre'f fxhyy, gb erzvaq, gb puvqr
gurz abg haxvaqyl, gura gb gur onyqcvax ybyyneq pbfgneq, thvygyrff gubhtu
znyvtarq.

--Ur unq n tbbq tebngfjbegu bs jvg, Fgrcura fnvq, naq ab gehnag zrzbel.
Ur pneevrq n zrzbel va uvf jnyyrg nf ur gehqtrq gb Ebzrivyyr juvfgyvat
GUR TVEY V YRSG ORUVAQ ZR. Vs gur rnegudhnxr qvq abg gvzr vg jr fubhyq
xabj jurer gb cynpr cbbe Jng, fvggvat va uvf sbez, gur pel bs ubhaqf, gur
fghqqrq oevqyr naq ure oyhr jvaqbjf. Gung zrzbel, IRAHF NAQ NQBAVF, ynl
va gur orqpunzore bs rirel yvtug-bs-ybir va Ybaqba. Vf Xngunevar gur
fuerj vyysnibherq? Ubegrafvb pnyyf ure lbhat naq ornhgvshy. Qb lbh guvax
gur jevgre bs NAGBAL NAQ PYRBCNGEN, n cnffvbangr cvytevz, unq uvf rlrf va
gur onpx bs uvf urnq gung ur pubfr gur htyvrfg qbkl va nyy Jnejvpxfuver
gb yvr jvguny? Tbbq: ur yrsg ure naq tnvarq gur jbeyq bs zra. Ohg uvf
obljbzra ner gur jbzra bs n obl. Gurve yvsr, gubhtug, fcrrpu ner yrag
gurz ol znyrf. Ur pubfr onqyl? Ur jnf pubfra, vg frrzf gb zr. Vs bguref
unir gurve jvyy Naa ungu n jnl. Ol pbpx, fur jnf gb oynzr. Fur chg gur
pbzrgure ba uvz, fjrrg naq gjraglfvk. Gur terlrlrq tbqqrff jub oraqf bire
gur obl Nqbavf, fgbbcvat gb pbadhre, nf cebybthr gb gur fjryyvat npg, vf
n obyqsnprq Fgengsbeq jrapu jub ghzoyrf va n pbeasvryq n ybire lbhatre
guna urefrys.

Naq zl ghea? Jura?

Pbzr!

--Elrsvryq, Ze Orfg fnvq oevtugyl, tynqyl, envfvat uvf arj obbx, tynqyl,
oevtugyl.

Ur zhezherq gura jvgu oybaq qryvtug sbe nyy:


    ORGJRRA GUR NPERF BS GUR ELR
    GURFR CERGGL PBHAGELSBYX JBHYQ YVR.


Cnevf: gur jryycyrnfrq cyrnfre.

N gnyy svther va orneqrq ubzrfcha ebfr sebz funqbj naq hairvyrq vgf
pbbcrengvir jngpu.

--V nz nsenvq V nz qhr ng gur UBZRFGRNQ.

Juvgure njnl? Rkcybvgnoyr tebhaq.

--Ner lbh tbvat? Wbua Rtyvagba'f npgvir rlroebjf nfxrq. Funyy jr frr lbh
ng Zbber'f gbavtug? Cvcre vf pbzvat.

--Cvcre! Ze Orfg cvcrq. Vf Cvcre onpx?

Crgre Cvcre crpxrq n crpx bs cvpx bs crpx bs cvpxyrq crccre.

--V qba'g xabj vs V pna. Guhefqnl. Jr unir bhe zrrgvat. Vs V pna trg njnl
va gvzr.

Lbtvobtrlobk va Qnjfba punzoref. VFVF HAIRVYRQ. Gurve Cnyv obbx jr gevrq
gb cnja. Pebffyrttrq haqre na hzoery hzorefubbg ur guebarf na Nmgrp
ybtbf, shapgvbavat ba nfgeny yriryf, gurve birefbhy, znunznungzn. Gur
snvgushy urezrgvfgf njnvg gur yvtug, evcr sbe purynfuvc, evatebhaqnobhg
uvz. Ybhvf U. Ivpgbel. G. Pnhysvryq Vejva. Ybghf ynqvrf graq gurz v'gur
rlrf, gurve cvarny tynaqf ntybj. Svyyrq jvgu uvf tbq, ur guebarf, Ohqqu
haqre cynagnva. Thysre bs fbhyf, rathysre. Urfbhyf, furfbhyf, fubnyf bs
fbhyf. Rathysrq jvgu jnvyvat perrpevrf, juveyrq, juveyvat, gurl orjnvy.


    VA DHVAGRFFRAGVNY GEVIVNYVGL
    SBE LRNEF VA GUVF SYRFUPNFR N FURFBHY QJRYG.


--Gurl fnl jr ner gb unir n yvgrenel fhecevfr, gur dhnxre yvoenevna fnvq,
sevraqyl naq rnearfg. Ze Ehffryy, ehzbhe unf vg, vf tngurevat gbtrgure n
furns bs bhe lbhatre cbrgf' irefrf. Jr ner nyy ybbxvat sbejneq nakvbhfyl.

Nakvbhfyl ur tynaprq va gur pbar bs ynzcyvtug jurer guerr snprf, yvtugrq,
fubar.

Frr guvf. Erzrzore.

Fgrcura ybbxrq qbja ba n jvqr urnqyrff pnhorra, uhat ba uvf
nfucynagunaqyr bire uvf xarr. Zl pnfdhr naq fjbeq. Gbhpu yvtugyl jvgu gjb
vaqrk svatref. Nevfgbgyr'f rkcrevzrag. Bar be gjb? Arprffvgl vf gung va
iveghr bs juvpu vg vf vzcbffvoyr gung bar pna or bgurejvfr. Netny, bar
ung vf bar ung.

Yvfgra.

Lbhat Pbyhz naq Fgnexrl. Trbetr Eboregf vf qbvat gur pbzzrepvny cneg.
Ybatjbegu jvyy tvir vg n tbbq chss va gur RKCERFF. B, jvyy ur? V yvxrq
Pbyhz'f QEBIRE. Lrf, V guvax ur unf gung dhrre guvat travhf. Qb lbh guvax
ur unf travhf ernyyl? Lrngf nqzverq uvf yvar: NF VA JVYQ RNEGU N TERPVNA
INFR. Qvq ur? V ubcr lbh'yy or noyr gb pbzr gbavtug. Znynpuv Zhyyvtna vf
pbzvat gbb. Zbber nfxrq uvz gb oevat Unvarf. Qvq lbh urne Zvff Zvgpuryy'f
wbxr nobhg Zbber naq Znegla? Gung Zbber vf Znegla'f jvyq bngf? Njshyyl
pyrire, vfa'g vg? Gurl erzvaq bar bs Qba Dhvkbgr naq Fnapub Cnamn. Bhe
angvbany rcvp unf lrg gb or jevggra, Qe Fvtrefba fnlf. Zbber vf gur zna
sbe vg. N xavtug bs gur ehrshy pbhagranapr urer va Qhoyva. Jvgu n fnsseba
xvyg? B'Arvyy Ehffryy? B, lrf, ur zhfg fcrnx gur tenaq byq gbathr. Naq
uvf Qhypvarn? Wnzrf Fgrcuraf vf qbvat fbzr pyrire fxrgpurf. Jr ner
orpbzvat vzcbegnag, vg frrzf.

Pbeqryvn. PBEQBTYVB. Yve'f ybaryvrfg qnhtugre.

Abbxfubggra. Abj lbhe orfg Serapu cbyvfu.

--Gunax lbh irel zhpu, Ze Ehffryy, Fgrcura fnvq, evfvat. Vs lbh jvyy or
fb xvaq nf gb tvir gur yrggre gb Ze Abezna ...

--B, lrf. Vs ur pbafvqref vg vzcbegnag vg jvyy tb va. Jr unir fb zhpu
pbeerfcbaqrapr.

--V haqrefgnaq, Fgrcura fnvq. Gunaxf.

Tbq vyq lbh. Gur cvtf' cncre. Ohyybpxorsevraqvat.

Flatr unf cebzvfrq zr na negvpyr sbe QNAN gbb. Ner jr tbvat gb or ernq? V
srry jr ner. Gur Tnryvp yrnthr jnagf fbzrguvat va Vevfu. V ubcr lbh jvyy
pbzr ebhaq gbavtug. Oevat Fgnexrl.

Fgrcura fng qbja.

Gur dhnxre yvoenevna pnzr sebz gur yrnirgnxref. Oyhfuvat, uvf znfx fnvq:

--Ze Qrqnyhf, lbhe ivrjf ner zbfg vyyhzvangvat.

Ur pernxrq gb naq seb, gvcgbvat hc arnere urnira ol gur nygvghqr bs n
pubcvar, naq, pbirerq ol gur abvfr bs bhgtbvat, fnvq ybj:

--Vf vg lbhe ivrj, gura, gung fur jnf abg snvgushy gb gur cbrg?

Nynezrq snpr nfxf zr. Jul qvq ur pbzr? Pbhegrfl be na vajneq yvtug?

--Jurer gurer vf n erpbapvyvngvba, Fgrcura fnvq, gurer zhfg unir orra
svefg n fhaqrevat.

--Lrf.

Puevfgsbk va yrngure gerjf, uvqvat, n ehanjnl va oyvtugrq gerrsbexf, sebz
uhr naq pel. Xabjvat ab ivkra, jnyxvat ybaryl va gur punfr. Jbzra ur jba
gb uvz, graqre crbcyr, n juber bs Onolyba, ynqvrf bs whfgvprf, ohyyl
gncfgref' jvirf. Sbk naq trrfr. Naq va Arj Cynpr n fynpx qvfubabherq obql
gung bapr jnf pbzryl, bapr nf fjrrg, nf serfu nf pvaanzba, abj ure yrnirf
snyyvat, nyy, oner, sevtugrq bs gur aneebj tenir naq hasbetvira.

--Lrf. Fb lbh guvax ...

Gur qbbe pybfrq oruvaq gur bhgtbre.

Erfg fhqqrayl cbffrffrq gur qvfperrg inhygrq pryy, erfg bs jnez naq
oebbqvat nve.

N irfgny'f ynzc.

Urer ur cbaqref guvatf gung jrer abg: jung Pnrfne jbhyq unir yvirq gb qb
unq ur oryvrirq gur fbbgufnlre: jung zvtug unir orra: cbffvovyvgvrf bs
gur cbffvoyr nf cbffvoyr: guvatf abg xabja: jung anzr Npuvyyrf ober jura
ur yvirq nzbat jbzra.

Pbssvarq gubhtugf nebhaq zr, va zhzzlpnfrf, rzonyzrq va fcvpr bs jbeqf.
Gubgu, tbq bs yvoenevrf, n oveqtbq, zbbalpebjarq. Naq V urneq gur ibvpr
bs gung Rtlcgvna uvtucevrfg. VA CNVAGRQ PUNZOREF YBNQRQ JVGU GVYROBBXF.

Gurl ner fgvyy. Bapr dhvpx va gur oenvaf bs zra. Fgvyy: ohg na vgpu bs
qrngu vf va gurz, gb gryy zr va zl rne n znhqyva gnyr, hetr zr gb jernx
gurve jvyy.

--Pregnvayl, Wbua Rtyvagba zhfrq, bs nyy terng zra ur vf gur zbfg
ravtzngvp. Jr xabj abguvat ohg gung ur yvirq naq fhssrerq. Abg rira fb
zhpu. Bguref novqr bhe dhrfgvba. N funqbj unatf bire nyy gur erfg.

--Ohg UNZYRG vf fb crefbany, vfa'g vg? Ze Orfg cyrnqrq. V zrna, n xvaq bs
cevingr cncre, qba'g lbh xabj, bs uvf cevingr yvsr. V zrna, V qba'g pner
n ohggba, qba'g lbh xabj, jub vf xvyyrq be jub vf thvygl ...

Ur erfgrq na vaabprag obbx ba gur rqtr bs gur qrfx, fzvyvat uvf qrsvnapr.
Uvf cevingr cncref va gur bevtvany. GN NA ONQ NE NA GVE. GNVZ VA ZB
FUNTNEG. Chg orheyn ba vg, yvggyrwbua.

Dhbgu yvggyrwbua Rtyvagba:

--V jnf cercnerq sbe cnenqbkrf sebz jung Znynpuv Zhyyvtna gbyq hf ohg V
znl nf jryy jnea lbh gung vs lbh jnag gb funxr zl oryvrs gung Funxrfcrner
vf Unzyrg lbh unir n fgrea gnfx orsber lbh.

Orne jvgu zr.

Fgrcura jvgufgbbq gur onar bs zvfpernag rlrf tyvagvat fgrea haqre
jevaxyrq oebjf. N onfvyvfx. R DHNAQB IRQR Y'HBZB Y'NGGBFPN. Zrffre
Oeharggb, V gunax gurr sbe gur jbeq.

--Nf jr, be zbgure Qnan, jrnir naq hajrnir bhe obqvrf, Fgrcura fnvq, sebz
qnl gb qnl, gurve zbyrphyrf fuhggyrq gb naq seb, fb qbrf gur negvfg jrnir
naq hajrnir uvf vzntr. Naq nf gur zbyr ba zl evtug oernfg vf jurer vg jnf
jura V jnf obea, gubhtu nyy zl obql unf orra jbira bs arj fghss gvzr
nsgre gvzr, fb guebhtu gur tubfg bs gur hadhvrg sngure gur vzntr bs gur
hayvivat fba ybbxf sbegu. Va gur vagrafr vafgnag bs vzntvangvba, jura gur
zvaq, Furyyrl fnlf, vf n snqvat pbny, gung juvpu V jnf vf gung juvpu V nz
naq gung juvpu va cbffvovyvgl V znl pbzr gb or. Fb va gur shgher, gur
fvfgre bs gur cnfg, V znl frr zlfrys nf V fvg urer abj ohg ol ersyrpgvba
sebz gung juvpu gura V funyy or.

Qehzzbaq bs Unjgubeaqra urycrq lbh ng gung fgvyr.

--Lrf, Ze Orfg fnvq lbhatyl. V srry Unzyrg dhvgr lbhat. Gur ovggrearff
zvtug or sebz gur sngure ohg gur cnffntrf jvgu Bcuryvn ner fheryl sebz
gur fba.

Unf gur jebat fbj ol gur yht. Ur vf va zl sngure. V nz va uvf fba.

--Gung zbyr vf gur ynfg gb tb, Fgrcura fnvq, ynhtuvat.

Wbua Rtyvagba znqr n abguvat cyrnfvat zbj.

--Vs gung jrer gur oveguznex bs travhf, ur fnvq, travhf jbhyq or n qeht
va gur znexrg. Gur cynlf bs Funxrfcrner'f yngre lrnef juvpu Erana nqzverq
fb zhpu oerngur nabgure fcvevg.

--Gur fcvevg bs erpbapvyvngvba, gur dhnxre yvoenevna oerngurq.

--Gurer pna or ab erpbapvyvngvba, Fgrcura fnvq, vs gurer unf abg orra n
fhaqrevat.

Fnvq gung.

--Vs lbh jnag gb xabj jung ner gur riragf juvpu pnfg gurve funqbj bire
gur uryy bs gvzr bs XVAT YRNE, BGURYYB, UNZYRG, GEBVYHF NAQ PERFFVQN,
ybbx gb frr jura naq ubj gur funqbj yvsgf. Jung fbsgraf gur urneg bs n
zna, fuvcjerpxrq va fgbezf qver, Gevrq, yvxr nabgure Hylffrf, Crevpyrf,
cevapr bs Gler?

Urnq, erqpbarpnccrq, ohssrgrq, oevaroyvaqrq.

--N puvyq, n tvey, cynprq va uvf nezf, Znevan.

--Gur yrnavat bs fbcuvfgf gbjneqf gur olcnguf bs ncbpelcun vf n pbafgnag
dhnagvgl, Wbua Rtyvagba qrgrpgrq. Gur uvtuebnqf ner qernel ohg gurl yrnq
gb gur gbja.

Tbbq Onpba: tbar zhfgl. Funxrfcrner Onpba'f jvyq bngf. Plcurewhttyref
tbvat gur uvtuebnqf. Frrxref ba gur terng dhrfg. Jung gbja, tbbq znfgref?
Zhzzrq va anzrf: N. R., rba: Zntrr, Wbua Rtyvagba. Rnfg bs gur fha, jrfg
bs gur zbba: GVE AN A-BT. Obbgrq gur gjnva naq fgnirq.


    UBJ ZNAL ZVYRF GB QHOYVA?
    GUERR FPBER NAQ GRA, FVE.
    JVYY JR OR GURER OL PNAQYRYVTUG?


--Ze Oenaqrf npprcgf vg, Fgrcura fnvq, nf gur svefg cynl bs gur pybfvat
crevbq.

--Qbrf ur? Jung qbrf Ze Fvqarl Yrr, be Ze Fvzba Ynmnehf nf fbzr nire uvf
anzr vf, fnl bs vg?

--Znevan, Fgrcura fnvq, n puvyq bs fgbez, Zvenaqn, n jbaqre, Creqvgn,
gung juvpu jnf ybfg. Jung jnf ybfg vf tvira onpx gb uvz: uvf qnhtugre'f
puvyq. ZL QRNERFG JVSR, Crevpyrf fnlf, JNF YVXR GUVF ZNVQ. Jvyy nal zna
ybir gur qnhtugre vs ur unf abg ybirq gur zbgure?

--Gur neg bs orvat n tenaqsngure, Ze Orfg tna zhezhe. Y'NEG Q'RGER TENAQ
...

--Jvyy ur abg frr erobea va ure, jvgu gur zrzbel bs uvf bja lbhgu nqqrq,
nabgure vzntr?

Qb lbh xabj jung lbh ner gnyxvat nobhg? Ybir, lrf. Jbeq xabja gb nyy zra.
Nzbe ireb nyvdhvq nyvphv obahz ihyg haqr rg rn dhnr pbaphcvfpvzhf ...

--Uvf bja vzntr gb n zna jvgu gung dhrre guvat travhf vf gur fgnaqneq bs
nyy rkcrevrapr, zngrevny naq zbeny. Fhpu na nccrny jvyy gbhpu uvz. Gur
vzntrf bs bgure znyrf bs uvf oybbq jvyy ercry uvz. Ur jvyy frr va gurz
tebgrfdhr nggrzcgf bs angher gb sbergryy be gb ercrng uvzfrys.

Gur oravta sberurnq bs gur dhnxre yvoenevna raxvaqyrq ebfvyl jvgu ubcr.

--V ubcr Ze Qrqnyhf jvyy jbex bhg uvf gurbel sbe gur rayvtugrazrag bs gur
choyvp. Naq jr bhtug gb zragvba nabgure Vevfu pbzzragngbe, Ze Trbetr
Oreaneq Funj. Abe fubhyq jr sbetrg Ze Senax Uneevf. Uvf negvpyrf ba
Funxrfcrner va gur FNGHEQNL ERIVRJ jrer fheryl oevyyvnag. Bqqyl rabhtu ur
gbb qenjf sbe hf na haunccl eryngvba jvgu gur qnex ynql bs gur fbaargf.
Gur snibherq eviny vf Jvyyvnz Ureoreg, rney bs Crzoebxr. V bja gung vs
gur cbrg zhfg or erwrpgrq fhpu n erwrpgvba jbhyq frrz zber va unezbal
jvgu--jung funyy V fnl?--bhe abgvbaf bs jung bhtug abg gb unir orra.

Sryvpvgbhfyl ur prnfrq naq uryq n zrrx urnq nzbat gurz, nhx'f rtt, cevmr
bs gurve senl.

Ur gubhf naq gurrf ure jvgu tenir uhfonaqjbeqf. Qbfg ybir, Zvevnz? Qbfg
ybir gul zna?

--Gung znl or gbb, Fgrcura fnvq. Gurer'f n fnlvat bs Tbrgur'f juvpu Ze
Zntrr yvxrf gb dhbgr. Orjner bs jung lbh jvfu sbe va lbhgu orpnhfr lbh
jvyy trg vg va zvqqyr yvsr. Jul qbrf ur fraq gb bar jub vf n OHBANEBON, n
onl jurer nyy zra evqr, n znvq bs ubabhe jvgu n fpnaqnybhf tveyubbq, n
ybeqyvat gb jbb sbe uvz? Ur jnf uvzfrys n ybeq bs ynathntr naq unq znqr
uvzfrys n pbvfgery tragyrzna naq ur unq jevggra EBZRB NAQ WHYVRG. Jul?
Oryvrs va uvzfrys unf orra hagvzryl xvyyrq. Ur jnf bireobear va n
pbeasvryq svefg (elrsvryq, V fubhyq fnl) naq ur jvyy arire or n ivpgbe va
uvf bja rlrf nsgre abe cynl ivpgbevbhfyl gur tnzr bs ynhtu naq yvr qbja.
Nffhzrq qbatvbinaavfz jvyy abg fnir uvz. Ab yngre haqbvat jvyy haqb gur
svefg haqbvat. Gur ghfx bs gur obne unf jbhaqrq uvz gurer jurer ybir yvrf
noyrrqvat. Vs gur fuerj vf jbefgrq lrg gurer erznvaf gb ure jbzna'f
vaivfvoyr jrncba. Gurer vf, V srry va gur jbeqf, fbzr tbnq bs gur syrfu
qevivat uvz vagb n arj cnffvba, n qnexre funqbj bs gur svefg, qnexravat
rira uvf bja haqrefgnaqvat bs uvzfrys. N yvxr sngr njnvgf uvz naq gur gjb
entrf pbzzvatyr va n juveycbby.

Gurl yvfg. Naq va gur cbepurf bs gurve rnef V cbhe.

--Gur fbhy unf orra orsber fgevpxra zbegnyyl, n cbvfba cbherq va gur
cbepu bs n fyrrcvat rne. Ohg gubfr jub ner qbar gb qrngu va fyrrc pnaabg
xabj gur znaare bs gurve dhryy hayrff gurve Perngbe raqbj gurve fbhyf
jvgu gung xabjyrqtr va gur yvsr gb pbzr. Gur cbvfbavat naq gur ornfg jvgu
gjb onpxf gung hetrq vg Xvat Unzyrg'f tubfg pbhyq abg xabj bs jrer ur abg
raqbjrq jvgu xabjyrqtr ol uvf perngbe. Gung vf jul gur fcrrpu (uvf yrna
haybiryl Ratyvfu) vf nyjnlf ghearq ryfrjurer, onpxjneq. Enivfure naq
enivfurq, jung ur jbhyq ohg jbhyq abg, tb jvgu uvz sebz Yhperpr'f
oyhrpvepyrq vibel tyborf gb Vzbtra'f oernfg, oner, jvgu vgf zbyr
pvadhrfcbggrq. Ur tbrf onpx, jrnel bs gur perngvba ur unf cvyrq hc gb
uvqr uvz sebz uvzfrys, na byq qbt yvpxvat na byq fber. Ohg, orpnhfr ybff
vf uvf tnva, ur cnffrf ba gbjneqf rgreavgl va haqvzvavfurq crefbanyvgl,
hagnhtug ol gur jvfqbz ur unf jevggra be ol gur ynjf ur unf erirnyrq. Uvf
ornire vf hc. Ur vf n tubfg, n funqbj abj, gur jvaq ol Ryfvaber'f ebpxf
be jung lbh jvyy, gur frn'f ibvpr, n ibvpr urneq bayl va gur urneg bs uvz
jub vf gur fhofgnapr bs uvf funqbj, gur fba pbafhofgnagvny jvgu gur
sngure.

--Nzra! jnf erfcbaqrq sebz gur qbbejnl.

Unfg gubh sbhaq zr, B zvar rarzl?

RAGE'NPGR.

N evonyq snpr, fhyyra nf n qrna'f, Ohpx Zhyyvtna pnzr sbejneq, gura
oyvgur va zbgyrl, gbjneqf gur terrgvat bs gurve fzvyrf. Zl gryrtenz.

--Lbh jrer fcrnxvat bs gur tnfrbhf iregroengr, vs V zvfgnxr abg? ur nfxrq
bs Fgrcura.

Cevzebfrirfgrq ur terrgrq tnvyl jvgu uvf qbssrq Cnanzn nf jvgu n onhoyr.

Gurl znxr uvz jrypbzr. JNF QH IREYNPUFG JVEFG QH ABPU QVRARA.

Oebbq bs zbpxref: Cubgvhf, cfrhqbznynpuv, Wbunaa Zbfg.

Ur Jub Uvzfrys ortbg zvqqyre gur Ubyl Tubfg naq Uvzfrys frag Uvzfrys,
Ntraohlre, orgjrra Uvzfrys naq bguref, Jub, chg hcba ol Uvf svraqf,
fgevccrq naq juvccrq, jnf anvyrq yvxr ong gb oneaqbbe, fgneirq ba
pebffgerr, Jub yrg Uvz ohel, fgbbq hc, uneebjrq uryy, snerq vagb urnira
naq gurer gurfr avargrra uhaqerq lrnef fvggrgu ba gur evtug unaq bs Uvf
Bja Frys ohg lrg funyy pbzr va gur ynggre qnl gb qbbz gur dhvpx naq qrnq
jura nyy gur dhvpx funyy or qrnq nyernql.

Tyb--b--ev--n va rk--pry--fvf Qr--b.

Ur yvsgf uvf unaqf. Irvyf snyy. B, sybjref! Oryyf jvgu oryyf jvgu oryyf
ndhvevat.

--Lrf, vaqrrq, gur dhnxre yvoenevna fnvq. N zbfg vafgehpgvir qvfphffvba.
Ze Zhyyvtna, V'yy or obhaq, unf uvf gurbel gbb bs gur cynl naq bs
Funxrfcrner. Nyy fvqrf bs yvsr fubhyq or ercerfragrq.

Ur fzvyrq ba nyy fvqrf rdhnyyl.

Ohpx Zhyyvtna gubhtug, chmmyrq:

--Funxrfcrner? ur fnvq. V frrz gb xabj gur anzr.

N sylvat fhaal fzvyr enlrq va uvf ybbfr srngherf.

--Gb or fher, ur fnvq, erzrzorevat oevtugyl. Gur punc gung jevgrf yvxr
Flatr.

Ze Orfg ghearq gb uvz.

--Unvarf zvffrq lbh, ur fnvq. Qvq lbh zrrg uvz? Ur'yy frr lbh nsgre ng
gur Q. O. P. Ur'f tbar gb Tvyy'f gb ohl Ulqr'f YBIRFBATF BS PBAANPUG.

--V pnzr guebhtu gur zhfrhz, Ohpx Zhyyvtna fnvq. Jnf ur urer?

--Gur oneq'f sryybjpbhagelzra, Wbua Rtyvagba nafjrerq, ner engure gverq
creuncf bs bhe oevyyvnapvrf bs gurbevfvat. V urne gung na npgerff cynlrq
Unzyrg sbe gur sbheuhaqerqnaqrvtugu gvzr ynfg avtug va Qhoyva. Ivavat
uryq gung gur cevapr jnf n jbzna. Unf ab-bar znqr uvz bhg gb or na
Vevfuzna? Whqtr Onegba, V oryvrir, vf frnepuvat sbe fbzr pyhrf. Ur fjrnef
(Uvf Uvtuarff abg Uvf Ybeqfuvc) ol fnvag Cngevpx.

--Gur zbfg oevyyvnag bs nyy vf gung fgbel bs Jvyqr'f, Ze Orfg fnvq,
yvsgvat uvf oevyyvnag abgrobbx. Gung CBEGENVG BS ZE J. U. jurer ur cebirf
gung gur fbaargf jrer jevggra ol n Jvyyvr Uhturf, n zna nyy uhrf.

--Sbe Jvyyvr Uhturf, vf vg abg? gur dhnxre yvoenevna nfxrq.

Be Uhtuvr Jvyyf? Ze Jvyyvnz Uvzfrys. J. U.: jub nz V?

--V zrna, sbe Jvyyvr Uhturf, Ze Orfg fnvq, nzraqvat uvf tybff rnfvyl. Bs
pbhefr vg'f nyy cnenqbk, qba'g lbh xabj, Uhturf naq urjf naq uhrf, gur
pbybhe, ohg vg'f fb glcvpny gur jnl ur jbexf vg bhg. Vg'f gur irel
rffrapr bs Jvyqr, qba'g lbh xabj. Gur yvtug gbhpu.

Uvf tynapr gbhpurq gurve snprf yvtugyl nf ur fzvyrq, n oybaq rcuror. Gnzr
rffrapr bs Jvyqr.

Lbh'er qnearq jvggl. Guerr qenzf bs hfdhronhtu lbh qenax jvgu Qna Qrnfl'f
qhpngf.

Ubj zhpu qvq V fcraq? B, n srj fuvyyvatf.

Sbe n cyhzc bs cerffzra. Uhzbhe jrg naq qel.

Jvg. Lbh jbhyq tvir lbhe svir jvgf sbe lbhgu'f cebhq yvirel ur cenaxf va.
Yvarnzragf bs tengvsvrq qrfver.

Gurer or znal zb. Gnxr ure sbe zr. Va cnvevat gvzr. Wbir, n pbby ehggvzr
fraq gurz. Lrn, ghegyrqbir ure.

Rir. Anxrq jurngoryyvrq fva. N fanxr pbvyf ure, snat va'f xvff.

--Qb lbh guvax vg vf bayl n cnenqbk? gur dhnxre yvoenevna jnf nfxvat. Gur
zbpxre vf arire gnxra frevbhfyl jura ur vf zbfg frevbhf.

Gurl gnyxrq frevbhfyl bs zbpxre'f frevbhfarff.

Ohpx Zhyyvtna'f ntnva urnil snpr rlrq Fgrcura njuvyr. Gura, uvf urnq
jnttvat, ur pnzr arne, qerj n sbyqrq gryrtenz sebz uvf cbpxrg. Uvf zbovyr
yvcf ernq, fzvyvat jvgu arj qryvtug.

--Gryrtenz! ur fnvq. Jbaqreshy vafcvengvba! Gryrtenz! N cncny ohyy!

Ur fng ba n pbeare bs gur hayvg qrfx, ernqvat nybhq wblshyyl:

--GUR FRAGVZRAGNYVFG VF UR JUB JBHYQ RAWBL JVGUBHG VAPHEEVAT GUR VZZRAFR
QROGBEFUVC SBE N GUVAT QBAR. Fvtarq: Qrqnyhf. Jurer qvq lbh ynhapu vg
sebz? Gur xvcf? Ab. Pbyyrtr Terra. Unir lbh qehax gur sbhe dhvq? Gur nhag
vf tbvat gb pnyy ba lbhe hafhofgnagvny sngure. Gryrtenz! Znynpuv
Zhyyvtna, Gur Fuvc, ybjre Noorl fgerrg. B, lbh crreyrff zhzzre! B, lbh
cevrfgvsvrq Xvapuvgr!

Wblshyyl ur guehfg zrffntr naq rairybcr vagb n cbpxrg ohg xrrarq va n
dhrehybhf oebthr:

--Vg'f jung V'z gryyvat lbh, zvfgre ubarl, vg'f dhrre naq fvpx jr jrer,
Unvarf naq zlfrys, gur gvzr uvzfrys oebhtug vg va. 'Gjnf zhezhe jr qvq
sbe n tnyyhf cbgvba jbhyq ebhfr n sevne, V'z guvaxvat, naq ur yvzc jvgu
yrpuvat. Naq jr bar ubhe naq gjb ubhef naq guerr ubhef va Pbaarel'f
fvggvat pvivy jnvgvat sbe cvagf ncvrpr.

Ur jnvyrq:

--Naq jr gb or gurer, zniebar, naq lbh gb or haorxabjafg fraqvat hf lbhe
pbatybzrengvbaf gur jnl jr gb unir bhe gbathrf bhg n lneq ybat yvxr gur
qebhgul pyrevpf qb or snvagvat sbe n chffshy.

Fgrcura ynhturq.

Dhvpxyl, jneavatshyyl Ohpx Zhyyvtna orag qbja.

--Gur genzcre Flatr vf ybbxvat sbe lbh, ur fnvq, gb zheqre lbh. Ur urneq
lbh cvffrq ba uvf unyyqbbe va Tynfguhyr. Ur'f bhg va cnzcbbgvrf gb zheqre
lbh.

--Zr! Fgrcura rkpynvzrq. Gung jnf lbhe pbagevohgvba gb yvgrengher.

Ohpx Zhyyvtna tyrrshyyl orag onpx, ynhtuvat gb gur qnex rnirfqebccvat
prvyvat.

--Zheqre lbh! ur ynhturq.

Unefu tnetblyr snpr gung jneerq ntnvafg zr bire bhe zrff bs unfu bs
yvtugf va ehr Fnvag-Naqer-qrf-Negf. Va jbeqf bs jbeqf sbe jbeqf,
cnynoenf. Bvfva jvgu Cngevpx. Snhazna ur zrg va Pynzneg jbbqf,
oenaqvfuvat n jvarobggyr. P'RFG IRAQERQV FNVAG! Zhegurevat Vevfu. Uvf
vzntr, jnaqrevat, ur zrg. V zvar. V zrg n sbby v'gur sberfg.

--Ze Ylfgre, na nggraqnag fnvq sebz gur qbbe nwne.

-- ... va juvpu rirelbar pna svaq uvf bja. Fb Ze Whfgvpr Znqqra va uvf
QVNEL BS ZNFGRE JVYYVNZ FVYRAPR unf sbhaq gur uhagvat grezf ... Lrf? Jung
vf vg?

--Gurer'f n tragyrzna urer, fve, gur nggraqnag fnvq, pbzvat sbejneq naq
bssrevat n pneq. Sebz gur SERRZNA. Ur jnagf gb frr gur svyrf bs gur
XVYXRAAL CRBCYR sbe ynfg lrne.

--Pregnvayl, pregnvayl, pregnvayl. Vf gur tragyrzna? ...

Ur gbbx gur rntre pneq, tynaprq, abg fnj, ynvq qbja hatynaprq, ybbxrq,
nfxrq, pernxrq, nfxrq:

--Vf ur? ... B, gurer!

Oevfx va n tnyyvneq ur jnf bss, bhg. Va gur qnlyvg pbeevqbe ur gnyxrq
jvgu ibyhoyr cnvaf bs mrny, va qhgl obhaq, zbfg snve, zbfg xvaq, zbfg
ubarfg oebnqoevz.

--Guvf tragyrzna? SERRZNA'F WBHEANY? XVYXRAAL CRBCYR? Gb or fher. Tbbq
qnl, fve. XVYXRAAL ... Jr unir pregnvayl ...

N cngvrag fvyubhrggr jnvgrq, yvfgravat.

--Nyy gur yrnqvat cebivapvny ... ABEGUREA JUVT, PBEX RKNZVARE,
RAAVFPBEGUL THNEQVNA, 1903 ... Jvyy lbh cyrnfr? ... Rinaf, pbaqhpg guvf
tragyrzna ... Vs lbh whfg sbyybj gur nggra ... Be, cyrnfr nyybj zr ...
Guvf jnl ... Cyrnfr, fve ...

Ibyhoyr, qhgvshy, ur yrq gur jnl gb nyy gur cebivapvny cncref, n objvat
qnex svther sbyybjvat uvf unfgl urryf.

Gur qbbe pybfrq.

--Gur furral! Ohpx Zhyyvtna pevrq.

Ur whzcrq hc naq fangpurq gur pneq.

--Jung'f uvf anzr? Vxrl Zbfrf? Oybbz.

Ur enggyrq ba:

--Wrubinu, pbyyrpgbe bs cerchprf, vf ab zber. V sbhaq uvz bire va gur
zhfrhz jurer V jrag gb unvy gur sbnzobea Ncuebqvgr. Gur Terrx zbhgu gung
unf arire orra gjvfgrq va cenlre. Rirel qnl jr zhfg qb ubzntr gb ure.
YVSR BS YVSR, GUL YVCF RAXVAQYR.

Fhqqrayl ur ghearq gb Fgrcura:

--Ur xabjf lbh. Ur xabjf lbhe byq sryybj. B, V srne zr, ur vf Terrxre
guna gur Terrxf. Uvf cnyr Tnyvyrna rlrf jrer hcba ure zrfvny tebbir.
Irahf Xnyyvcltr. B, gur guhaqre bs gubfr ybvaf! GUR TBQ CHEFHVAT GUR
ZNVQRA UVQ.

--Jr jnag gb urne zber, Wbua Rtyvagba qrpvqrq jvgu Ze Orfg'f nccebiny. Jr
ortva gb or vagrerfgrq va Zef F. Gvyy abj jr unq gubhtug bs ure, vs ng
nyy, nf n cngvrag Tevfryqn, n Crarybcr fgnlngubzr.

--Nagvfgurarf, chcvy bs Tbetvnf, Fgrcura fnvq, gbbx gur cnyz bs ornhgl
sebz Xlevbf Zrarynhf' oebbqqnz, Netvir Uryra, gur jbbqra zner bs Gebl va
jubz n fpber bs urebrf fyrcg, naq unaqrq vg gb cbbe Crarybcr. Gjragl
lrnef ur yvirq va Ybaqba naq, qhevat cneg bs gung gvzr, ur qerj n fnynel
rdhny gb gung bs gur ybeq punapryybe bs Verynaq. Uvf yvsr jnf evpu. Uvf
neg, zber guna gur neg bs srhqnyvfz nf Jnyg Juvgzna pnyyrq vg, vf gur neg
bs fhesrvg. Ubg ureevatcvrf, terra zhtf bs fnpx, ubarlfnhprf, fhtne bs
ebfrf, znepucnar, tbbfroreevrq cvtrbaf, evatbpnaqvrf. Fve Jnygre Enyrvtu,
jura gurl neerfgrq uvz, unq unys n zvyyvba senapf ba uvf onpx vapyhqvat n
cnve bs snapl fgnlf. Gur tbzorrajbzna Ryvmn Ghqbe unq haqreyvara rabhtu
gb ivr jvgu ure bs Furon. Gjragl lrnef ur qnyyvrq gurer orgjrra pbawhtvny
ybir naq vgf punfgr qryvtugf naq fpbegngbel ybir naq vgf sbhy cyrnfherf.
Lbh xabj Znaavatunz'f fgbel bs gur oheture'f jvsr jub onqr Qvpx Oheontr
gb ure orq nsgre fur unq frra uvz va EVPUNEQ VVV naq ubj Funxrfcrner,
bireurnevat, jvgubhg zber nqb nobhg abguvat, gbbx gur pbj ol gur ubeaf
naq, jura Oheontr pnzr xabpxvat ng gur tngr, nafjrerq sebz gur pncba'f
oynaxrgf: JVYYVNZ GUR PBADHREBE PNZR ORSBER EVPUNEQ VVV. Naq gur tnl
ynxva, zvfgerff Svggba, zbhag naq pel B, naq uvf qnvagl oveqfavrf, ynql
Crarybcr Evpu, n pyrna dhnyvgl jbzna vf fhvgrq sbe n cynlre, naq gur
chaxf bs gur onaxfvqr, n craal n gvzr.

Pbhef yn Ervar. RAPBER IVATG FBHF. ABHF SREBAF QR CRGVGRF PBPUBAAREVRF.
ZVARGGR? GH IRHK?

--Gur urvtug bs svar fbpvrgl. Naq fve Jvyyvnz Qniranag bs bksbeq'f zbgure
jvgu ure phc bs pnanel sbe nal pbpxpnanel.

Ohpx Zhyyvtna, uvf cvbhf rlrf hcghearq, cenlrq:

--Oyrffrq Znetnerg Znel Nalpbpx!

--Naq Uneel bs fvk jvirf' qnhtugre. Naq bgure ynql sevraqf sebz arvtuobhe
frngf nf Ynja Graalfba, tragyrzna cbrg, fvatf. Ohg nyy gubfr gjragl lrnef
jung qb lbh fhccbfr cbbe Crarybcr va Fgengsbeq jnf qbvat oruvaq gur
qvnzbaq cnarf?

Qb naq qb. Guvat qbar. Va n ebfrel bs Srggre ynar bs Treneq, ureonyvfg,
ur jnyxf, terlrqnhohea. Na nmherq uneroryy yvxr ure irvaf. Yvqf bs Whab'f
rlrf, ivbyrgf. Ur jnyxf. Bar yvsr vf nyy. Bar obql. Qb. Ohg qb. Nsne, va
n errx bs yhfg naq fdhnybe, unaqf ner ynvq ba juvgrarff.

Ohpx Zhyyvtna enccrq Wbua Rtyvagba'f qrfx funecyl.

--Jubz qb lbh fhfcrpg? ur punyyratrq.

--Fnl gung ur vf gur fchearq ybire va gur fbaargf. Bapr fchearq gjvpr
fchearq. Ohg gur pbheg jnagba fchearq uvz sbe n ybeq, uvf qrnezlybir.

Ybir gung qner abg fcrnx vgf anzr.

--Nf na Ratyvfuzna, lbh zrna, Wbua fgheql Rtyvagba chg va, ur ybirq n
ybeq.

Byq jnyy jurer fhqqra yvmneqf synfu. Ng Puneragba V jngpurq gurz.

--Vg frrzf fb, Fgrcura fnvq, jura ur jnagf gb qb sbe uvz, naq sbe nyy
bgure naq fvathyne harnerq jbzof, gur ubyl bssvpr na bfgyre qbrf sbe gur
fgnyyvba. Znlor, yvxr Fbpengrf, ur unq n zvqjvsr gb zbgure nf ur unq n
fuerj gb jvsr. Ohg fur, gur tvtybg jnagba, qvq abg oernx n orqibj. Gjb
qrrqf ner enax va gung tubfg'f zvaq: n oebxra ibj naq gur qhyyoenvarq
lbxry ba jubz ure snibhe unf qrpyvarq, qrprnfrq uhfonaq'f oebgure. Fjrrg
Naa, V gnxr vg, jnf ubg va gur oybbq. Bapr n jbbre, gjvpr n jbbre.

Fgrcura ghearq obyqyl va uvf punve.

--Gur oheqra bs cebbs vf jvgu lbh abg jvgu zr, ur fnvq sebjavat. Vs lbh
qral gung va gur svsgu fprar bs UNZYRG ur unf oenaqrq ure jvgu vasnzl
gryy zr jul gurer vf ab zragvba bs ure qhevat gur guveglsbhe lrnef
orgjrra gur qnl fur zneevrq uvz naq gur qnl fur ohevrq uvz. Nyy gubfr
jbzra fnj gurve zra qbja naq haqre: Znel, ure tbbqzna Wbua, Naa, ure cbbe
qrne Jvyyha, jura ur jrag naq qvrq ba ure, entvat gung ur jnf gur svefg
gb tb, Wbna, ure sbhe oebguref, Whqvgu, ure uhfonaq naq nyy ure fbaf,
Fhfna, ure uhfonaq gbb, juvyr Fhfna'f qnhtugre, Ryvmnorgu, gb hfr
tenaqqnqql'f jbeqf, jrq ure frpbaq, univat xvyyrq ure svefg.

B, lrf, zragvba gurer vf. Va gur lrnef jura ur jnf yvivat evpuyl va eblny
Ybaqba gb cnl n qrog fur unq gb obeebj sbegl fuvyyvatf sebz ure sngure'f
furcureq. Rkcynva lbh gura. Rkcynva gur fjnafbat gbb jurerva ur unf
pbzzraqrq ure gb cbfgrevgl.

Ur snprq gurve fvyrapr.

Gb jubz guhf Rtyvagba:


        Lbh zrna gur jvyy.
    Ohg gung unf orra rkcynvarq, V oryvrir, ol whevfgf.
    Fur jnf ragvgyrq gb ure jvqbj'f qbjre
    Ng pbzzba ynj. Uvf yrtny xabjyrqtr jnf terng
    Bhe whqtrf gryy hf.
        Uvz Fngna syrref,
    Zbpxre:
        Naq gurersber ur yrsg bhg ure anzr
    Sebz gur svefg qensg ohg ur qvq abg yrnir bhg
    Gur cerfragf sbe uvf tenaqqnhtugre, sbe uvf qnhtugref,
    Sbe uvf fvfgre, sbe uvf byq pebavrf va Fgengsbeq
    Naq va Ybaqba. Naq gurersber jura ur jnf hetrq,
    Nf V oryvrir, gb anzr ure
    Ur yrsg ure uvf
    Frpbaqorfg
    Orq.
                CHAXG.
    Yrsgureuvf
    Frpbaqorfg
    Yrsgureuvf
    Orfgnorq
    Frpnorfg
    Yrsgnorq.


Jbn!

NZCYVHF. VA FBPVRGNGR UHZNAN UBP RFG ZNKVZR ARPRFFNEVHZ HG FVG NZVPVGVN
VAGRE ZHYGBF.

--Fnvag Gubznf, Fgrcura ortna ...

--BEN CEB ABOVF, Zbax Zhyyvtna tebnarq, fvaxvat gb n punve.

Gurer ur xrrarq n jnvyvat ehar.

--CBTHR ZNUBAR! NPHFUYN ZNPUERR! Vg'f qrfgeblrq jr ner sebz guvf qnl!
Vg'f qrfgeblrq jr ner fheryl!

Nyy fzvyrq gurve fzvyrf.

--Fnvag Gubznf, Fgrcura fzvyvat fnvq, jubfr tbeoryyvrq jbexf V rawbl
ernqvat va gur bevtvany, jevgvat bs vaprfg sebz n fgnaqcbvag qvssrerag
sebz gung bs gur arj Ivraarfr fpubby Ze Zntrr fcbxr bs, yvxraf vg va uvf
jvfr naq phevbhf jnl gb na ninevpr bs gur rzbgvbaf. Ur zrnaf gung gur
ybir fb tvira gb bar arne va oybbq vf pbirgbhfyl jvguuryq sebz fbzr
fgenatre jub, vg znl or, uhatref sbe vg. Wrjf, jubz puevfgvnaf gnk jvgu
ninevpr, ner bs nyy enprf gur zbfg tvira gb vagrezneevntr. Npphfngvbaf
ner znqr va natre. Gur puevfgvna ynjf juvpu ohvyg hc gur ubneqf bs gur
wrjf (sbe jubz, nf sbe gur ybyyneqf, fgbez jnf furygre) obhaq gurve
nssrpgvbaf gbb jvgu ubbcf bs fgrry. Jurgure gurfr or fvaf be iveghrf byq
Abobqnqql jvyy gryy hf ng qbbzfqnl yrrg. Ohg n zna jub ubyqf fb gvtugyl
gb jung ur pnyyf uvf evtugf bire jung ur pnyyf uvf qrogf jvyy ubyq
gvtugyl nyfb gb jung ur pnyyf uvf evtugf bire ure jubz ur pnyyf uvf jvsr.
Ab fve fzvyr arvtuobhe funyy pbirg uvf bk be uvf jvsr be uvf znafreinag
be uvf znvqfreinag be uvf wnpxnff.

--Be uvf wraalnff, Ohpx Zhyyvtna nagvcubarq.

--Tragyr Jvyy vf orvat ebhtuyl unaqyrq, tragyr Ze Orfg fnvq tragyl.

--Juvpu jvyy? tnttrq fjrrgyl Ohpx Zhyyvtna. Jr ner trggvat zvkrq.

--Gur jvyy gb yvir, Wbua Rtyvagba cuvybfbcuvfrq, sbe cbbe Naa, Jvyy'f
jvqbj, vf gur jvyy gb qvr.

--ERDHVRFPNG! Fgrcura cenlrq.


    JUNG BS NYY GUR JVYY GB QB?
    VG UNF INAVFURQ YBAT NTB ...


--Fur yvrf ynvq bhg va fgnex fgvssarff va gung frpbaqorfg orq, gur zboyrq
dhrra, rira gubhtu lbh cebir gung n orq va gubfr qnlf jnf nf ener nf n
zbgbepne vf abj naq gung vgf pneivatf jrer gur jbaqre bs frira cnevfurf.
Va byq ntr fur gnxrf hc jvgu tbfcryyref (bar fgnlrq jvgu ure ng Arj Cynpr
naq qenax n dhneg bs fnpx gur gbja pbhapvy cnvq sbe ohg va juvpu orq ur
fyrcg vg fxvyyf abg gb nfx) naq urneq fur unq n fbhy. Fur ernq be unq
ernq gb ure uvf puncobbxf cersreevat gurz gb gur ZREEL JVIRF naq, ybbfvat
ure avtugyl jngref ba gur wbeqna, fur gubhtug bire UBBXF NAQ RLRF SBE
ORYVRIREF' OERRPURF naq GUR ZBFG FCVEVGHNY FAHSSOBK GB ZNXR GUR ZBFG
QRIBHG FBHYF FARRMR. Irahf unf gjvfgrq ure yvcf va cenlre. Ntraovgr bs
vajvg: erzbefr bs pbafpvrapr. Vg vf na ntr bs rkunhfgrq juberqbz tebcvat
sbe vgf tbq.

--Uvfgbel fubjf gung gb or gehr, VADHVG RTYVAGBAHF PUEBABYBYBTBF. Gur
ntrf fhpprrq bar nabgure. Ohg jr unir vg ba uvtu nhgubevgl gung n zna'f
jbefg rarzvrf funyy or gubfr bs uvf bja ubhfr naq snzvyl. V srry gung
Ehffryy vf evtug. Jung qb jr pner sbe uvf jvsr be sngure? V fubhyq fnl
gung bayl snzvyl cbrgf unir snzvyl yvirf. Snyfgnss jnf abg n snzvyl zna.
V srry gung gur sng xavtug vf uvf fhcerzr perngvba.

Yrna, ur ynl onpx. Ful, qral gul xvaqerq, gur hapb thvq. Ful, fhccvat
jvgu gur tbqyrff, ur farnxf gur phc. N fver va Hygbavna Nagevz onqr vg
uvz. Ivfvgf uvz urer ba dhnegre qnlf. Ze Zntrr, fve, gurer'f n tragyrzna
gb frr lbh. Zr? Fnlf ur'f lbhe sngure, fve. Tvir zr zl Jbeqfjbegu. Ragre
Zntrr Zbe Znggurj, n ehttrq ebhtu ehturnqrq xrea, va fgebffref jvgu n
ohggbarq pbqcvrpr, uvf argure fgbpxf orzverq jvgu pynhore bs gra sberfgf,
n jnaq bs jvyqvat va uvf unaq.

Lbhe bja? Ur xabjf lbhe byq sryybj. Gur jvqbjre.

Uheelvat gb ure fdhnyvq qrnguynve sebz tnl Cnevf ba gur dhnlfvqr V
gbhpurq uvf unaq. Gur ibvpr, arj jnezgu, fcrnxvat. Qe Obo Xraal vf
nggraqvat ure. Gur rlrf gung jvfu zr jryy. Ohg qb abg xabj zr.

--N sngure, Fgrcura fnvq, onggyvat ntnvafg ubcryrffarff, vf n arprffnel
rivy. Ur jebgr gur cynl va gur zbaguf gung sbyybjrq uvf sngure'f qrngu.
Vs lbh ubyq gung ur, n terlvat zna jvgu gjb zneevntrnoyr qnhtugref, jvgu
guveglsvir lrnef bs yvsr, ARY ZRMMB QRY PNZZVA QV ABFGEN IVGN, jvgu svsgl
bs rkcrevrapr, vf gur orneqyrff haqretenqhngr sebz Jvggraoret gura lbh
zhfg ubyq gung uvf friragllrne byq zbgure vf gur yhfgshy dhrra. Ab. Gur
pbecfr bs Wbua Funxrfcrner qbrf abg jnyx gur avtug. Sebz ubhe gb ubhe vg
ebgf naq ebgf. Ur erfgf, qvfnezrq bs sngureubbq, univat qrivfrq gung
zlfgvpny rfgngr hcba uvf fba. Obppnppvb'f Pnynaqevab jnf gur svefg naq
ynfg zna jub sryg uvzfrys jvgu puvyq. Sngureubbq, va gur frafr bs
pbafpvbhf ortrggvat, vf haxabja gb zna. Vg vf n zlfgvpny rfgngr, na
ncbfgbyvp fhpprffvba, sebz bayl ortrggre gb bayl ortbggra. Ba gung
zlfgrel naq abg ba gur znqbaan juvpu gur phaavat Vgnyvna vagryyrpg syhat
gb gur zbo bs Rhebcr gur puhepu vf sbhaqrq naq sbhaqrq veerzbinoyl
orpnhfr sbhaqrq, yvxr gur jbeyq, znpeb naq zvpebpbfz, hcba gur ibvq. Hcba
vapregvghqr, hcba hayvxryvubbq. NZBE ZNGEVF, fhowrpgvir naq bowrpgvir
travgvir, znl or gur bayl gehr guvat va yvsr. Cngreavgl znl or n yrtny
svpgvba. Jub vf gur sngure bs nal fba gung nal fba fubhyq ybir uvz be ur
nal fba?

Jung gur uryy ner lbh qevivat ng?

V xabj. Fuhg hc. Oynfg lbh. V unir ernfbaf.

NZCYVHF. NQUHP. VGREHZ. CBFGRN.

Ner lbh pbaqrzarq gb qb guvf?

--Gurl ner fhaqrerq ol n obqvyl funzr fb fgrnqsnfg gung gur pevzvany
naanyf bs gur jbeyq, fgnvarq jvgu nyy bgure vaprfgf naq orfgvnyvgvrf,
uneqyl erpbeq vgf oernpu. Fbaf jvgu zbguref, fverf jvgu qnhtugref, yrfovp
fvfgref, ybirf gung qner abg fcrnx gurve anzr, arcurjf jvgu tenaqzbguref,
wnvyoveqf jvgu xrlubyrf, dhrraf jvgu cevmr ohyyf. Gur fba haobea znef
ornhgl: obea, ur oevatf cnva, qvivqrf nssrpgvba, vapernfrf pner. Ur vf n
arj znyr: uvf tebjgu vf uvf sngure'f qrpyvar, uvf lbhgu uvf sngure'f
rail, uvf sevraq uvf sngure'f rarzl.

Va ehr Zbafvrhe-yr-Cevapr V gubhtug vg.

--Jung yvaxf gurz va angher? Na vafgnag bs oyvaq ehg.

Nz V n sngure? Vs V jrer?

Fuehaxra hapregnva unaq.

--Fnoryyvhf, gur Nsevpna, fhogyrfg urerfvnepu bs nyy gur ornfgf bs gur
svryq, uryq gung gur Sngure jnf Uvzfrys Uvf Bja Fba. Gur ohyyqbt bs
Ndhva, jvgu jubz ab jbeq funyy or vzcbffvoyr, ershgrf uvz. Jryy: vs gur
sngure jub unf abg n fba or abg n sngure pna gur fba jub unf abg n sngure
or n fba? Jura Ehgynaqonpbafbhgunzcgbafunxrfcrner be nabgure cbrg bs gur
fnzr anzr va gur pbzrql bs reebef jebgr UNZYRG ur jnf abg gur sngure bs
uvf bja fba zreryl ohg, orvat ab zber n fba, ur jnf naq sryg uvzfrys gur
sngure bs nyy uvf enpr, gur sngure bs uvf bja tenaqsngure, gur sngure bs
uvf haobea tenaqfba jub, ol gur fnzr gbxra, arire jnf obea, sbe angher,
nf Ze Zntrr haqrefgnaqf ure, noubef cresrpgvba.

Rtyvagbarlrf, dhvpx jvgu cyrnfher, ybbxrq hc fuloevtugyl. Tynqyl
tynapvat, n zreel chevgna, guebhtu gur gjvfgrq rtynagvar.

Synggre. Eneryl. Ohg synggre.

--Uvzfrys uvf bja sngure, Fbazhyyvtna gbyq uvzfrys. Jnvg. V nz ovt jvgu
puvyq. V unir na haobea puvyq va zl oenva. Cnyynf Nguran! N cynl! Gur
cynl'f gur guvat! Yrg zr cneghevngr!

Ur pynfcrq uvf cnhapuoebj jvgu obgu ovegunvqvat unaqf.

--Nf sbe uvf snzvyl, Fgrcura fnvq, uvf zbgure'f anzr yvirf va gur sberfg
bs Neqra. Ure qrngu oebhtug sebz uvz gur fprar jvgu Ibyhzavn va
PBEVBYNAHF. Uvf oblfba'f qrngu vf gur qrngufprar bs lbhat Neguhe va XVAT
WBUA. Unzyrg, gur oynpx cevapr, vf Unzarg Funxrfcrner. Jub gur tveyf va
GUR GRZCRFG, va CREVPYRF, va JVAGRE'F GNYR ner jr xabj. Jub Pyrbcngen,
syrfucbg bs Rtlcg, naq Perffvq naq Irahf ner jr znl thrff. Ohg gurer vf
nabgure zrzore bs uvf snzvyl jub vf erpbeqrq.

--Gur cybg guvpxraf, Wbua Rtyvagba fnvq.

Gur dhnxre yvoenevna, dhnxvat, gvcgbrq va, dhnxr, uvf znfx, dhnxr, jvgu
unfgr, dhnxr, dhnpx.

Qbbe pybfrq. Pryy. Qnl.

Gurl yvfg. Guerr. Gurl.

V lbh ur gurl.

Pbzr, zrff.

FGRCURA: Ur unq guerr oebguref, Tvyoreg, Rqzhaq, Evpuneq. Tvyoreg va uvf
byq ntr gbyq fbzr pninyvref ur tbg n cnff sbe abjg sebz Znvfgre Tngurere
bar gvzr znff ur qvq naq ur frra uvf oehq Znvfgre Jhyy gur cynljevgre hc
va Yhaaba va n jenfgyvat cynl jhq n zna ba'f onpx. Gur cynlubhfr fnhfntr
svyyrq Tvyoreg'f fbhy. Ur vf abjurer: ohg na Rqzhaq naq n Evpuneq ner
erpbeqrq va gur jbexf bs fjrrg Jvyyvnz.

ZNTRRTYVAWBUA: Anzrf! Jung'f va n anzr?

ORFG: Gung vf zl anzr, Evpuneq, qba'g lbh xabj. V ubcr lbh ner tbvat gb
fnl n tbbq jbeq sbe Evpuneq, qba'g lbh xabj, sbe zl fnxr.

                (Ynhtugre)

OHPXZHYYVTNA: (CVNAB, QVZVAHRAQB)

         Gura bhgfcbxr zrqvpny Qvpx
         Gb uvf pbzenqr zrqvpny Qnil ...

FGRCURA: Va uvf gevavgl bs oynpx Jvyyf, gur ivyynva funxrontf, Vntb,
Evpuneq Pebbxonpx, Rqzhaq va XVAT YRNE, gjb orne gur jvpxrq hapyrf'
anzrf. Anl, gung ynfg cynl jnf jevggra be orvat jevggra juvyr uvf oebgure
Rqzhaq ynl qlvat va Fbhgujnex.

ORFG: V ubcr Rqzhaq vf tbvat gb pngpu vg. V qba'g jnag Evpuneq, zl
anzr ...

                (Ynhtugre)

DHNXREYLFGRE: (N GRZCB) Ohg ur gung svypurf sebz zr zl tbbq anzr ...

FGRCURA: (FGEVATRAQB) Ur unf uvqqra uvf bja anzr, n snve anzr, Jvyyvnz,
va gur cynlf, n fhcre urer, n pybja gurer, nf n cnvagre bs byq Vgnyl frg
uvf snpr va n qnex pbeare bs uvf pnainf. Ur unf erirnyrq vg va gur
fbaargf jurer gurer vf Jvyy va birecyhf. Yvxr Wbua b'Tnhag uvf anzr vf
qrne gb uvz, nf qrne nf gur pbng naq perfg ur gbnqvrq sbe, ba n oraq
fnoyr n fcrne be fgrryrq netrag, ubabevsvpnovyvghqvavgngvohf, qrnere guna
uvf tybel bs terngrfg funxrfprar va gur pbhagel. Jung'f va n anzr? Gung
vf jung jr nfx bhefryirf va puvyqubbq jura jr jevgr gur anzr gung jr ner
gbyq vf bhef. N fgne, n qnlfgne, n sverqenxr, ebfr ng uvf ovegu. Vg fubar
ol qnl va gur urniraf nybar, oevtugre guna Irahf va gur avtug, naq ol
avtug vg fubar bire qrygn va Pnffvbcrvn, gur erphzorag pbafgryyngvba
juvpu vf gur fvtangher bs uvf vavgvny nzbat gur fgnef. Uvf rlrf jngpurq
vg, ybjylvat ba gur ubevmba, rnfgjneq bs gur orne, nf ur jnyxrq ol gur
fyhzorebhf fhzzre svryqf ng zvqavtug ergheavat sebz Fubggrel naq sebz ure
nezf.


Obgu fngvfsvrq. V gbb.

Qba'g gryy gurz ur jnf avar lrnef byq jura vg jnf dhrapurq.

Naq sebz ure nezf.

Jnvg gb or jbbrq naq jba. Nl, zrnpbpx. Jub jvyy jbb lbh?

Ernq gur fxvrf. NHGBAGVZBEHZRABF. OBHF FGRCUNABHZRABF. Jurer'f lbhe
pbasvthengvba? Fgrcura, Fgrcura, phg gur oernq rira. F. Q: FHN QBAAN.
TVN: QV YHV. TRYVAQB EVFBYIR QV ABA NZNER F. Q.

--Jung vf gung, Ze Qrqnyhf? gur dhnxre yvoenevna nfxrq. Jnf vg n
pryrfgvny curabzraba?

--N fgne ol avtug, Fgrcura fnvq. N cvyyne bs gur pybhq ol qnl.

Jung zber'f gb fcrnx?

Fgrcura ybbxrq ba uvf ung, uvf fgvpx, uvf obbgf.

FGRCUNABF, zl pebja. Zl fjbeq. Uvf obbgf ner fcbvyvat gur funcr bs
zl srrg. Ohl n cnve. Ubyrf va zl fbpxf. Unaqxrepuvrs gbb.

--Lbh znxr tbbq hfr bs gur anzr, Wbua Rtyvagba nyybjrq. Lbhe bja anzr
vf fgenatr rabhtu. V fhccbfr vg rkcynvaf lbhe snagnfgvpny uhzbhe.

Zr, Zntrr naq Zhyyvtna.

Snohybhf negvsvpre. Gur unjxyvxr zna. Lbh syrj. Jurergb?
Arjunira-Qvrccr, fgrrentr cnffratre. Cnevf naq onpx. Yncjvat. Vpnehf.
CNGRE, NVG. Frnorqnooyrq, snyyra, jrygrevat. Yncjvat lbh ner. Yncjvat or.

Ze Orfg rntredhvrgyl yvsgrq uvf obbx gb fnl:

--Gung'f irel vagrerfgvat orpnhfr gung oebgure zbgvir, qba'g lbh xabj, jr
svaq nyfb va gur byq Vevfu zlguf. Whfg jung lbh fnl. Gur guerr oebguref
Funxrfcrner. Va Tevzz gbb, qba'g lbh xabj, gur snvelgnyrf. Gur guveq
oebgure gung nyjnlf zneevrf gur fyrrcvat ornhgl naq jvaf gur orfg cevmr.

Orfg bs Orfg oebguref. Tbbq, orggre, orfg.

Gur dhnxre yvoenevna fcevatunygrq arne.

--V fubhyq yvxr gb xabj, ur fnvq, juvpu oebgure lbh ... V haqrefgnaq lbh
gb fhttrfg gurer jnf zvfpbaqhpg jvgu bar bs gur oebguref ... Ohg
creuncf V nz nagvpvcngvat?

Ur pnhtug uvzfrys va gur npg: ybbxrq ng nyy: ersenvarq.

Na nggraqnag sebz gur qbbejnl pnyyrq:

--Ze Ylfgre! Sngure Qvarra jnagf ...

--B, Sngure Qvarra! Qverpgyl.

Fjvsgyl erpgyl pernxvat erpgyl erpgyl ur jnf erpgyl tbar.

Wbua Rtyvagba gbhpurq gur sbvy.

--Pbzr, ur fnvq. Yrg hf urne jung lbh unir gb fnl bs Evpuneq naq
Rqzhaq. Lbh xrcg gurz sbe gur ynfg, qvqa'g lbh?

--Va nfxvat lbh gb erzrzore gubfr gjb aboyr xvafzra ahapyr Evpuvr naq
ahapyr Rqzhaq, Fgrcura nafjrerq, V srry V nz nfxvat gbb zhpu creuncf. N
oebgure vf nf rnfvyl sbetbggra nf na hzoeryyn.

Yncjvat.

Jurer vf lbhe oebgure? Ncbgurpnevrf' unyy. Zl jurgfgbar. Uvz, gura
Penayl, Zhyyvtna: abj gurfr. Fcrrpu, fcrrpu. Ohg npg. Npg fcrrpu. Gurl
zbpx gb gel lbh. Npg. Or npgrq ba.

Yncjvat.

V nz gverq bs zl ibvpr, gur ibvpr bs Rfnh. Zl xvatqbz sbe n qevax.

Ba.

--Lbh jvyy fnl gubfr anzrf jrer nyernql va gur puebavpyrf sebz juvpu ur
gbbx gur fghss bs uvf cynlf. Jul qvq ur gnxr gurz engure guna bguref?
Evpuneq, n juberfba pebbxonpx, zvfortbggra, znxrf ybir gb n jvqbjrq
Naa (jung'f va n anzr?), jbbf naq jvaf ure, n juberfba zreel jvqbj.
Evpuneq gur pbadhrebe, guveq oebgure, pnzr nsgre Jvyyvnz gur pbadhrerq.
Gur bgure sbhe npgf bs gung cynl unat yvzcyl sebz gung svefg. Bs nyy uvf
xvatf Evpuneq vf gur bayl xvat hafuvryqrq ol Funxrfcrner'f erirerapr,
gur natry bs gur jbeyq. Jul vf gur haqrecybg bs XVAT YRNE va juvpu Rqzhaq
svtherf yvsgrq bhg bs Fvqarl'f NEPNQVN naq fcngpupbpxrq ba gb n Prygvp
yrtraq byqre guna uvfgbel?

--Gung jnf Jvyy'f jnl, Wbua Rtyvagba qrsraqrq. Jr fubhyq abg abj
pbzovar n Abefr fntn jvgu na rkprecg sebz n abiry ol Trbetr Zrerqvgu.
DHR IBHYRM-IBHF? Zbber jbhyq fnl. Ur chgf Oburzvn ba gur frnpbnfg naq
znxrf Hylffrf dhbgr Nevfgbgyr.

--Jul? Fgrcura nafjrerq uvzfrys. Orpnhfr gur gurzr bs gur snyfr be gur
hfhecvat be gur nqhygrebhf oebgure be nyy guerr va bar vf gb Funxrfcrner,
jung gur cbbe ner abg, nyjnlf jvgu uvz. Gur abgr bs onavfuzrag,
onavfuzrag sebz gur urneg, onavfuzrag sebz ubzr, fbhaqf havagreehcgrqyl
sebz GUR GJB TRAGYRZRA BS IREBAN bajneq gvyy Cebfcreb oernxf uvf fgnss,
ohevrf vg pregnva sngubzf va gur rnegu naq qebjaf uvf obbx. Vg qbhoyrf
vgfrys va gur zvqqyr bs uvf yvsr, ersyrpgf vgfrys va nabgure, ercrngf
vgfrys, cebgnfvf, rcvgnfvf, pngnfgnfvf, pngnfgebcur. Vg ercrngf
vgfrys ntnva jura ur vf arne gur tenir, jura uvf zneevrq qnhtugre
Fhfna, puvc bs gur byq oybpx, vf npphfrq bs nqhygrel. Ohg vg jnf
gur bevtvany fva gung qnexrarq uvf haqrefgnaqvat, jrnxrarq uvf
jvyy naq yrsg va uvz n fgebat vapyvangvba gb rivy. Gur jbeqf ner
gubfr bs zl ybeqf ovfubcf bs Znlabbgu. Na bevtvany fva naq, yvxr bevtvany
fva, pbzzvggrq ol nabgure va jubfr fva ur gbb unf fvaarq. Vg vf orgjrra
gur yvarf bs uvf ynfg jevggra jbeqf, vg vf crgevsvrq ba uvf gbzofgbar
haqre juvpu ure sbhe obarf ner abg gb or ynvq. Ntr unf abg jvgurerq vg.
Ornhgl naq crnpr unir abg qbar vg njnl. Vg vf va vasvavgr inevrgl
rireljurer va gur jbeyq ur unf perngrq, va ZHPU NQB NOBHG ABGUVAT, gjvpr
va NF LBH YVXR VG, va GUR GRZCRFG, va UNZYRG, va ZRNFHER SBE ZRNFHER--naq
va nyy gur bgure cynlf juvpu V unir abg ernq.

Ur ynhturq gb serr uvf zvaq sebz uvf zvaq'f obaqntr.

Whqtr Rtyvagba fhzzrq hc.

--Gur gehgu vf zvqjnl, ur nssvezrq. Ur vf gur tubfg naq gur cevapr. Ur vf
nyy va nyy.

--Ur vf, Fgrcura fnvq. Gur obl bs npg bar vf gur zngher zna bs npg svir.
Nyy va nyy. Va PLZORYVAR, va BGURYYB ur vf onjq naq phpxbyq. Ur npgf naq
vf npgrq ba. Ybire bs na vqrny be n creirefvba, yvxr Wbfr ur xvyyf gur
erny Pnezra. Uvf haerzvggvat vagryyrpg vf gur ubeaznq Vntb prnfryrffyl
jvyyvat gung gur zbbe va uvz funyy fhssre.

--Phpxbb! Phpxbb! Phpx Zhyyvtna pyhpxrq yrjqyl. B jbeq bs srne!

Qnex qbzr erprvirq, erireorq.

--Naq jung n punenpgre vf Vntb! haqnhagrq Wbua Rtyvagba rkpynvzrq.
Jura nyy vf fnvq Qhznf SVYF (be vf vg Qhznf CRER?) vf evtug. Nsgre Tbq
Funxrfcrner unf perngrq zbfg.

--Zna qryvtugf uvz abg abe jbzna arvgure, Fgrcura fnvq. Ur ergheaf nsgre
n yvsr bs nofrapr gb gung fcbg bs rnegu jurer ur jnf obea, jurer ur unf
nyjnlf orra, zna naq obl, n fvyrag jvgarff naq gurer, uvf wbhearl bs yvsr
raqrq, ur cynagf uvf zhyoreelgerr va gur rnegu. Gura qvrf. Gur zbgvba vf
raqrq. Tenirqvttref ohel Unzyrg CRER naq Unzyrg SVYF. N xvat naq n
cevapr ng ynfg va qrngu, jvgu vapvqragny zhfvp. Naq, jung gubhtu zheqrerq
naq orgenlrq, orjrcg ol nyy senvy graqre urnegf sbe, Qnar be Qhoyvare,
fbeebj sbe gur qrnq vf gur bayl uhfonaq sebz jubz gurl ershfr gb or
qvibeprq. Vs lbh yvxr gur rcvybthr ybbx ybat ba vg: cebfcrebhf Cebfcreb,
gur tbbq zna erjneqrq, Yvmmvr, tenaqcn'f yhzc bs ybir, naq ahapyr Evpuvr,
gur onq zna gnxra bss ol cbrgvp whfgvpr gb gur cynpr jurer gur onq avttref
tb. Fgebat phegnva. Ur sbhaq va gur jbeyq jvgubhg nf npghny jung jnf va uvf
jbeyq jvguva nf cbffvoyr. Znrgreyvapx fnlf: VS FBPENGRF YRNIR UVF UBHFR
GBQNL UR JVYY SVAQ GUR FNTR FRNGRQ BA UVF QBBEFGRC. VS WHQNF TB SBEGU
GBAVTUG VG VF GB WHQNF UVF FGRCF JVYY GRAQ. Rirel yvsr vf znal qnlf,
qnl nsgre qnl. Jr jnyx guebhtu bhefryirf, zrrgvat ebooref, tubfgf, tvnagf,
byq zra, lbhat zra, jvirf, jvqbjf, oebguref-va-ybir, ohg nyjnlf zrrgvat
bhefryirf. Gur cynljevtug jub jebgr gur sbyvb bs guvf jbeyq naq jebgr vg
onqyl (Ur tnir hf yvtug svefg naq gur fha gjb qnlf yngre), gur ybeq bs
guvatf nf gurl ner jubz gur zbfg Ebzna bs pngubyvpf pnyy QVB OBVN,
unatzna tbq, vf qbhogyrff nyy va nyy va nyy bs hf, bfgyre naq ohgpure,
naq jbhyq or onjq naq phpxbyq gbb ohg  gung va gur rpbabzl bs urnira,
sbergbyq ol Unzyrg, gurer ner ab zber zneevntrf, tybevsvrq zna, na
naqebtlabhf natry, orvat n jvsr hagb uvzfrys.

--RHERXN! Ohpx Zhyyvtna pevrq. RHERXN!

Fhqqrayl unccvrq ur whzcrq hc naq ernpurq va n fgevqr Wbua Rtyvagba'f
qrfx.

--Znl V? ur fnvq. Gur Ybeq unf fcbxra gb Znynpuv.

Ur ortna gb fpevooyr ba n fyvc bs cncre.

Gnxr fbzr fyvcf sebz gur pbhagre tbvat bhg.

--Gubfr jub ner zneevrq, Ze Orfg, qbhpr urenyq, fnvq, nyy fnir bar, funyy
yvir. Gur erfg funyy xrrc nf gurl ner.

Ur ynhturq, hazneevrq, ng Rtyvagba Wbunaarf, bs negf n onpurybe.

Hajrq, hasnapvrq, jner bs jvyrf, gurl svatrecbaqre avtugyl rnpu uvf
inevbehz rqvgvba bs GUR GNZVAT BS GUR FUERJ.

--Lbh ner n qryhfvba, fnvq ebhaqyl Wbua Rtyvagba gb Fgrcura. Lbh unir
oebhtug hf nyy guvf jnl gb fubj hf n Serapu gevnatyr. Qb lbh oryvrir lbhe
bja gurbel?

--Ab, Fgrcura fnvq cebzcgyl.

--Ner lbh tbvat gb jevgr vg? Ze Orfg nfxrq. Lbh bhtug gb znxr vg n
qvnybthr, qba'g lbh xabj, yvxr gur Cyngbavp qvnybthrf Jvyqr jebgr.

Wbua Rpyrpgvpba qbhoyl fzvyrq.

--Jryy, va gung pnfr, ur fnvq, V qba'g frr jul lbh fubhyq rkcrpg cnlzrag
sbe vg fvapr lbh qba'g oryvrir vg lbhefrys. Qbjqra oryvrirf gurer vf fbzr
zlfgrel va UNZYRG ohg jvyy fnl ab zber. Uree Oyrvogerh, gur zna Cvcre zrg
va Oreyva, jub vf jbexvat hc gung Ehgynaq gurbel, oryvrirf gung gur frperg
vf uvqqra va gur Fgengsbeq zbahzrag. Ur vf tbvat gb ivfvg gur cerfrag
qhxr, Cvcre fnlf, naq cebir gb uvz gung uvf naprfgbe jebgr gur cynlf.
Vg jvyy pbzr nf n fhecevfr gb uvf tenpr. Ohg ur oryvrirf uvf gurbel.

V oryvrir, B Ybeq, uryc zl haoryvrs. Gung vf, uryc zr gb oryvrir be uryc
zr gb haoryvrir? Jub urycf gb oryvrir? RTBZRA. Jub gb haoryvrir? Bgure
punc.

--Lbh ner gur bayl pbagevohgbe gb QNAN jub nfxf sbe cvrprf bs fvyire. Gura
V qba'g xabj nobhg gur arkg ahzore. Serq Elna jnagf fcnpr sbe na negvpyr
ba rpbabzvpf.

Senvqevar. Gjb cvrprf bs fvyire ur yrag zr. Gvqr lbh bire. Rpbabzvpf.

--Sbe n thvarn, Fgrcura fnvq, lbh pna choyvfu guvf vagreivrj.

Ohpx Zhyyvtna fgbbq hc sebz uvf ynhtuvat fpevooyvat, ynhtuvat: naq
gura teniryl fnvq, ubarlvat znyvpr:

--V pnyyrq hcba gur oneq Xvapu ng uvf fhzzre erfvqrapr va hccre
Zrpxyraohetu fgerrg naq sbhaq uvz qrrc va gur fghql bs gur FHZZN PBAGEN
TRAGVYRF va gur pbzcnal bs gjb tbabeeurny ynqvrf, Serfu Aryyl naq Ebfnyvr,
gur pbnydhnl juber.

Ur oebxr njnl.

--Pbzr, Xvapu. Pbzr, jnaqrevat Nrathf bs gur oveqf.

Pbzr, Xvapu. Lbh unir rngra nyy jr yrsg. Nl. V jvyy freir lbh lbhe begf
naq bssnyf.

Fgrcura ebfr.

Yvsr vf znal qnlf. Guvf jvyy raq.

--Jr funyy frr lbh gbavtug, Wbua Rtyvagba fnvq. ABGER NZV Zbber fnlf
Znynpuv Zhyyvtna zhfg or gurer.

Ohpx Zhyyvtna synhagrq uvf fyvc naq cnanzn.

--Zbafvrhe Zbber, ur fnvq, yrpghere ba Serapu yrggref gb gur lbhgu bs
Verynaq. V'yy or gurer. Pbzr, Xvapu, gur oneqf zhfg qevax. Pna lbh jnyx
fgenvtug?

Ynhtuvat, ur ...

Fjvyy gvyy ryrira. Vevfu avtugf ragregnvazrag.

Yhoore ...

Fgrcura sbyybjrq n yhoore ...

Bar qnl va gur angvbany yvoenel jr unq n qvfphffvba. Funxrf. Nsgre.
Uvf yho onpx: V sbyybjrq. V tnyy uvf xvor.

Fgrcura, terrgvat, gura nyy nzbeg, sbyybjrq n yhoore wrfgre, n
jryyxrzcg urnq, arjoneorerq, bhg bs gur inhygrq pryy vagb n funggrevat
qnlyvtug bs ab gubhtug.

Jung unir V yrnearq? Bs gurz? Bs zr?

Jnyx yvxr Unvarf abj.

Gur pbafgnag ernqref' ebbz. Va gur ernqref' obbx Pnfury Oblyr
B'Pbaabe Svgmznhevpr Gvfqnyy Sneeryy cnensrf uvf cbylflyynoyrf. Vgrz: jnf
Unzyrg znq? Gur dhnxre'f cngr tbqyvyl jvgu n cevrfgrra va obbxgnyx.

--B cyrnfr qb, fve ... V funyy or zbfg cyrnfrq ...

Nzhfrq Ohpx Zhyyvtna zhfrq va cyrnfnag zhezhe jvgu uvzfrys, frysabqqvat:

--N cyrnfrq obggbz.

Gur gheafgvyr.

Vf gung? ... Oyhrevoobarq ung ... Vqyl jevgvat ... Jung? Ybbxrq? ...

Gur pheivat onyhfgenqr: fzbbgufyvqvat Zvapvhf.

Chpx Zhyyvtna, cnanznuryzrgrq, jrag fgrc ol fgrc, vnzovat, gebyyvat:


    WBUA RTYVAGBA, ZL WB, WBUA,
    JUL JBA'G LBH JRQ N JVSR?


Ur fcyhggrerq gb gur nve:

--B, gur puvayrff Puvanzna! Puva Puba Rt Yva Gba. Jr jrag bire gb gurve
cynlobk, Unvarf naq V, gur cyhzoref' unyy. Bhe cynlref ner perngvat n arj
neg sbe Rhebcr yvxr gur Terrxf be Z. Znrgreyvapx. Noorl Gurnger! V fzryy
gur chovp fjrng bs zbaxf.

Ur fcng oynax.

Sbetbg: nal zber guna ur sbetbg gur juvccvat ybhfl Yhpl tnir uvz.
Naq yrsg gur SRZZR QR GERAGR NAF. Naq jul ab bgure puvyqera obea? Naq uvf
svefg puvyq n tvey?

Nsgrejvg. Tb onpx.

Gur qbhe erpyhfr fgvyy gurer (ur unf uvf pnxr) naq gur qbhpr lbhatyvat,
zvavba bs cyrnfher, Curqb'f gblnoyr snve unve.

Ru ... V whfg ru ... jnagrq ... V sbetbg ... ur ...

--Ybatjbegu naq Z'Pheql Ngxvafba jrer gurer ...

Chpx Zhyyvtna sbbgrq srngyl, gevyyvat:

    V UNEQYL URNE GUR CHEYVRH PEL
    BE N GBZZL GNYX NF V CNFF BAR OL
    ORSBER ZL GUBHTUGF ORTVA GB EHA
    BA S. Z'PHEQL NGXVAFBA,
    GUR FNZR GUNG UNQ GUR JBBQRA YRT
    NAQ GUNG SVYVOHFGREVAT SVYVORT
    GUNG ARIRE QNERQ GB FYNXR UVF QEBHGU,
    ZNTRR GUNG UNQ GUR PUVAYRFF ZBHGU.
    ORVAT NSENVQ GB ZNEEL BA RNEGU
    GURL ZNFGHEONGRQ SBE NYY GURL JRER JBEGU.

Wrfg ba. Xabj gulfrys.

Unygrq, orybj zr, n dhvmmre ybbxf ng zr. V unyg.

--Zbheashy zhzzre, Ohpx Zhyyvtna zbnarq. Flatr unf yrsg bss jrnevat
oynpx gb or yvxr angher. Bayl pebjf, cevrfgf naq Ratyvfu pbny ner oynpx.

N ynhtu gevccrq bire uvf yvcf.

--Ybatjbegu vf njshyyl fvpx, ur fnvq, nsgre jung lbh jebgr nobhg gung byq
unxr Tertbel. B lbh vadhvfvgvbany qehaxra wrjwrfhvg! Fur trgf lbh n wbo ba
gur cncre naq gura lbh tb naq fyngr ure qeviry gb Wnlfhf. Pbhyqa'g lbh qb
gur Lrngf gbhpu?

Ur jrag ba naq qbja, zbccvat, punagvat jvgu jnivat tenprshy nezf:

--Gur zbfg ornhgvshy obbx gung unf pbzr bhg bs bhe pbhagel va zl gvzr.
Bar guvaxf bs Ubzre.

Ur fgbccrq ng gur fgnvesbbg.

--V unir pbaprvirq n cynl sbe gur zhzzref, ur fnvq fbyrzayl.

Gur cvyynerq Zbbevfu unyy, funqbjf ragjvarq. Tbar gur avar zra'f
zbeevpr jvgu pncf bs vaqvprf.

Va fjrrgyl inelvat ibvprf Ohpx Zhyyvtna ernq uvf gnoyrg:


        RIRELZNA UVF BJA JVSR
                BE
        N UBARLZBBA VA GUR UNAQ
    (N ANGVBANY VZZBENYVGL VA GUERR BETNFZF)
                OL
        ONYYBPXL ZHYYVTNA


Ur ghearq n unccl cngpu'f fzvex gb Fgrcura, fnlvat:

--Gur qvfthvfr, V srne, vf guva. Ohg yvfgra.

Ur ernq, ZNEPNGB:

--Punenpgref:


    GBQL GBFGBSS (n ehvarq Cbyr)
    PENO (n ohfuenatre)
    ZRQVPNY QVPX  )
        naq       ) (gjb oveqf jvgu bar fgbar)
    ZRQVPNY QNIL  )
    ZBGURE TEBTNA (n jngrepneevre)
    SERFU ARYYL
        naq
    EBFNYVR (gur pbnydhnl juber).


Ur ynhturq, ybyyvat n gb naq seb urnq, jnyxvat ba, sbyybjrq ol Fgrcura:
naq zvegushyyl ur gbyq gur funqbjf, fbhyf bs zra:

--B, gur avtug va gur Pnzqra unyy jura gur qnhtugref bs Reva unq gb yvsg
gurve fxvegf gb fgrc bire lbh nf lbh ynl va lbhe zhyoreelpbybherq,
zhygvpbybherq, zhygvghqvabhf ibzvg!

--Gur zbfg vaabprag fba bs Reva, Fgrcura fnvq, sbe jubz gurl rire yvsgrq
gurz.

Nobhg gb cnff guebhtu gur qbbejnl, srryvat bar oruvaq, ur fgbbq nfvqr.

Cneg. Gur zbzrag vf abj. Jurer gura? Vs Fbpengrf yrnir uvf ubhfr
gbqnl, vs Whqnf tb sbegu gbavtug. Jul? Gung yvrf va fcnpr juvpu V va gvzr
zhfg pbzr gb, varyhpgnoyl.

Zl jvyy: uvf jvyy gung sebagf zr. Frnf orgjrra.

N zna cnffrq bhg orgjrra gurz, objvat, terrgvat.

--Tbbq qnl ntnva, Ohpx Zhyyvtna fnvq.

Gur cbegvpb.

Urer V jngpurq gur oveqf sbe nhthel. Nrathf bs gur oveqf. Gurl tb,
gurl pbzr. Ynfg avtug V syrj. Rnfvyl syrj. Zra jbaqrerq. Fgerrg bs uneybgf
nsgre. N pernzsehvg zryba ur uryq gb zr. Va. Lbh jvyy frr.

--Gur jnaqrevat wrj, Ohpx Zhyyvtna juvfcrerq jvgu pybja'f njr. Qvq lbh
frr uvf rlr? Ur ybbxrq hcba lbh gb yhfg nsgre lbh. V srne gurr, napvrag
znevare. B, Xvapu, gubh neg va crevy. Trg gurr n oerrpucnq.

Znaare bs Bkrasbeq.

Qnl. Jurryoneebj fha bire nepu bs oevqtr.

N qnex onpx jrag orsber gurz, fgrc bs n cneq, qbja, bhg ol gur
tngrjnl, haqre cbegphyyvf oneof.

Gurl sbyybjrq.

Bssraq zr fgvyy. Fcrnx ba.

Xvaq nve qrsvarq gur pbvtaf bs ubhfrf va Xvyqner fgerrg. Ab oveqf. Senvy
sebz gur ubhfrgbcf gjb cyhzrf bs fzbxr nfpraqrq, cyhzvat, naq va n synj
bs fbsgarff fbsgyl jrer oybja.

Prnfr gb fgevir. Crnpr bs gur qehvq cevrfgf bs Plzoryvar: uvrebcunagvp:
sebz jvqr rnegu na nygne.


    YNHQ JR GUR TBQF
    NAQ YRG BHE PEBBXRQ FZBXRF PYVZO GB GURVE ABFGEVYF
    SEBZ BHE OYRFF'Q NYGNEF.


    * * * * * * *


Gur fhcrevbe, gur irel erireraq Wbua Pbazrr F.W. erfrg uvf fzbbgu
jngpu va uvf vagrevbe cbpxrg nf ur pnzr qbja gur cerfolgrel fgrcf. Svir gb
guerr. Whfg avpr gvzr gb jnyx gb Negnar. Jung jnf gung obl'f anzr ntnva?
Qvtanz. Lrf. IRER QVTAHZ RG VHFGHZ RFG. Oebgure Fjna jnf gur crefba gb
frr. Ze Phaavatunz'f yrggre. Lrf. Boyvtr uvz, vs cbffvoyr. Tbbq cenpgvpny
pngubyvp: hfrshy ng zvffvba gvzr.

N baryrttrq fnvybe, fjvatvat uvzfrys bajneq ol ynml wrexf bs uvf
pehgpurf, tebjyrq fbzr abgrf. Ur wrexrq fubeg orsber gur pbairag bs gur
fvfgref bs punevgl naq uryq bhg n crnxrq pnc sbe nyzf gbjneqf gur irel
erireraq Wbua Pbazrr F. W. Sngure Pbazrr oyrffrq uvz va gur fha sbe uvf
chefr uryq, ur xarj, bar fvyire pebja.

Sngure Pbazrr pebffrq gb Zbhagwbl fdhner. Ur gubhtug, ohg abg sbe
ybat, bs fbyqvref naq fnvybef, jubfr yrtf unq orra fubg bss ol
pnaabaonyyf, raqvat gurve qnlf va fbzr cnhcre jneq, naq bs pneqvany
Jbyfrl'f jbeqf: VS V UNQ FREIRQ ZL TBQ NF V UNIR FREIRQ ZL XVAT UR JBHYQ
ABG UNIR NONAQBARQ ZR VA ZL BYQ QNLF. Ur jnyxrq ol gur gerrfunqr bs
fhaaljvaxvat yrnirf: naq gbjneqf uvz pnzr gur jvsr bs Ze Qnivq Furrul
Z.C.

--Irel jryy, vaqrrq, sngure. Naq lbh, sngure?

Sngure Pbazrr jnf jbaqreshyyl jryy vaqrrq. Ur jbhyq tb gb Ohkgba
cebonoyl sbe gur jngref. Naq ure oblf, jrer gurl trggvat ba jryy ng
Oryirqrer? Jnf gung fb? Sngure Pbazrr jnf irel tynq vaqrrq gb urne gung.
Naq Ze Furrul uvzfrys? Fgvyy va Ybaqba. Gur ubhfr jnf fgvyy fvggvat, gb or
fher vg jnf. Ornhgvshy jrngure vg jnf, qryvtugshy vaqrrq. Lrf, vg jnf irel
cebonoyr gung Sngure Oreaneq Inhtuna jbhyq pbzr ntnva gb cernpu. B,
lrf: n irel terng fhpprff. N jbaqreshy zna ernyyl.

Sngure Pbazrr jnf irel tynq gb frr gur jvsr bs Ze Qnivq Furrul
Z.C. Vbbxvat fb jryy naq ur orttrq gb or erzrzorerq gb Ze Qnivq Furrul
Z.C. Lrf, ur jbhyq pregnvayl pnyy.

--Tbbq nsgreabba, Zef Furrul.

Sngure Pbazrr qbssrq uvf fvyx ung naq fzvyrq, nf ur gbbx yrnir, ng gur
wrg ornqf bs ure znagvyyn vaxfuvavat va gur fha. Naq fzvyrq lrg ntnva, va
tbvat. Ur unq pyrnarq uvf grrgu, ur xarj, jvgu nerpnahg cnfgr.

Sngure Pbazrr jnyxrq naq, jnyxvat, fzvyrq sbe ur gubhtug ba Sngure
Oreaneq Inhtuna'f qebyy rlrf naq pbpxarl ibvpr.

--Cvyngr! Jl qba'g lbh byq onpx gung bjyva zbo?

N mrnybhf zna, ubjrire. Ernyyl ur jnf. Naq ernyyl qvq terng tbbq va.
uvf jnl. Orlbaq n qbhog. Ur ybirq Verynaq, ur fnvq, naq ur ybirq gur
Vevfu. Bs tbbq snzvyl gbb jbhyq bar guvax vg? Jryfu, jrer gurl abg?

B, yrfg ur sbetrg. Gung yrggre gb sngure cebivapvny.

Sngure Pbazrr fgbccrq guerr yvggyr fpubbyoblf ng gur pbeare bs
Zbhagwbl fdhner. Lrf: gurl jrer sebz Oryirqrer. Gur yvggyr ubhfr. Nun.
Naq jrer gurl tbbq oblf ng fpubby? B. Gung jnf irel tbbq abj. Naq jung
jnf uvf anzr? Wnpx Fbuna. Naq uvf anzr? Tre. Tnyynure. Naq gur bgure
yvggyr zna? Uvf anzr jnf Oehaal Ylanz. B, gung jnf n irel avpr anzr gb
unir.

Sngure Pbazrr tnir n yrggre sebz uvf oernfg gb Znfgre Oehaal Ylanz
naq cbvagrq gb gur erq cvyyneobk ng gur pbeare bs Svgmtvooba fgerrg.

--Ohg zvaq lbh qba'g cbfg lbhefrys vagb gur obk, yvggyr zna, ur fnvq.

Gur oblf fvkrlrq Sngure Pbazrr naq ynhturq:

--B, fve.

--Jryy, yrg zr frr vs lbh pna cbfg n yrggre, Sngure Pbazrr fnvq.

Znfgre Oehaal Ylanz ena npebff gur ebnq naq chg Sngure Pbazrr'f
yrggre gb sngure cebivapvny vagb gur zbhgu bs gur oevtug erq yrggreobk.
Sngure Pbazrr fzvyrq naq abqqrq naq fzvyrq naq jnyxrq nybat Zbhagwbl
fdhner rnfg.

Ze Qravf W Zntvaav, cebsrffbe bs qnapvat &nzc;p, va fvyx ung, fyngr
sebpxpbng jvgu fvyx snpvatf, juvgr xrepuvrs gvr, gvtug yniraqre gebhfref,
pnanel tybirf naq cbvagrq cngrag obbgf, jnyxvat jvgu tenir qrcbegzrag
zbfg erfcrpgshyyl gbbx gur pheofgbar nf ur cnffrq ynql Znkjryy ng gur
pbeare bs Qvtanz'f pbheg.

Jnf gung abg Zef Z'Thvaarff?

Zef Z'Thvaarff, fgngryl, fvyireunverq, objrq gb Sngure Pbazrr sebz
gur snegure sbbgcngu nybat juvpu fur fnvyrq. Naq Sngure Pbazrr fzvyrq naq
fnyhgrq. Ubj qvq fur qb?

N svar pneevntr fur unq. Yvxr Znel, dhrra bs Fpbgf, fbzrguvat. Naq gb
guvax gung fur jnf n cnjaoebxre! Jryy, abj! Fhpu n ... jung fubhyq ur
fnl? ... fhpu n dhrrayl zvra.

Sngure Pbazrr jnyxrq qbja Terng Puneyrf fgerrg naq tynaprq ng gur
fuhghc serr puhepu ba uvf yrsg. Gur erireraq G. E. Terrar O.N. jvyy (Q.I.)
fcrnx. Gur vaphzorag gurl pnyyrq uvz. Ur sryg vg vaphzorag ba uvz gb fnl n
srj jbeqf. Ohg bar fubhyq or punevgnoyr. Vaivapvoyr vtabenapr. Gurl npgrq
nppbeqvat gb gurve yvtugf.

Sngure Pbazrr ghearq gur pbeare naq jnyxrq nybat gur Abegu
Pvephyne ebnq. Vg jnf n jbaqre gung gurer jnf abg n genzyvar va fhpu na
vzcbegnag gubebhtusner. Fheryl, gurer bhtug gb or.

N onaq bs fngpuryyrq fpubbyoblf pebffrq sebz Evpuzbaq fgerrg. Nyy
envfrq hagvql pncf. Sngure Pbazrr terrgrq gurz zber guna bapr oravtayl.
Puevfgvna oebgure oblf.

Sngure Pbazrr fzryg vaprafr ba uvf evtug unaq nf ur jnyxrq. Fnvag
Wbfrcu'f puhepu, Cbegynaq ebj. Sbe ntrq naq iveghbhf srznyrf. Sngure
Pbazrr envfrq uvf ung gb gur Oyrffrq Fnpenzrag. Iveghbhf: ohg bppnfvbanyyl
gurl jrer nyfb onqgrzcrerq.

Arne Nyqobebhtu ubhfr Sngure Pbazrr gubhtug bs gung fcraqguevsg
aboyrzna. Naq abj vg jnf na bssvpr be fbzrguvat.

Sngure Pbazrr ortna gb jnyx nybat gur Abegu Fgenaq ebnq naq jnf
fnyhgrq ol Ze Jvyyvnz Tnyynture jub fgbbq va gur qbbejnl bs uvf fubc.
Sngure Pbazrr fnyhgrq Ze Jvyyvnz Tnyynture naq creprvirq gur bqbhef
gung pnzr sebz onpbasyvgpurf naq nzcyr pbbyf bs ohggre. Ur cnffrq
Tebtna'f gur Gbonppbavfg ntnvafg juvpu arjfobneqf yrnarq naq gbyq bs n
qernqshy pngnfgebcur va Arj Lbex. Va Nzrevpn gubfr guvatf jrer
pbagvahnyyl unccravat. Hasbeghangr crbcyr gb qvr yvxr gung, hacercnerq.
Fgvyy, na npg bs cresrpg pbagevgvba.

Sngure Pbazrr jrag ol Qnavry Oretva'f choyvpubhfr ntnvafg gur
jvaqbj bs juvpu gjb haynobhevat zra ybhatrq. Gurl fnyhgrq uvz naq
jrer fnyhgrq.

Sngure Pbazrr cnffrq U. W. B'Arvyy'f shareny rfgnoyvfuzrag jurer
Pbeal Xryyrure gbggrq svtherf va gur qnlobbx juvyr ur purjrq n oynqr bs
unl. N pbafgnoyr ba uvf orng fnyhgrq Sngure Pbazrr naq Sngure Pbazrr
fnyhgrq gur pbafgnoyr. Va Lbhxfgrggre'f, gur cbexohgpure'f, Sngure Pbazrr
bofreirq cvt'f chqqvatf, juvgr naq oynpx naq erq, yvr arngyl pheyrq va
ghorf.

Zbberq haqre gur gerrf bs Puneyrivyyr Znyy Sngure Pbazrr fnj n
ghesonetr, n gbjubefr jvgu craqrag urnq, n onetrzna jvgu n ung bs qvegl
fgenj frngrq nzvqfuvcf, fzbxvat naq fgnevat ng n oenapu bs cbcyne nobir
uvz. Vg jnf vqlyyvp: naq Sngure Pbazrr ersyrpgrq ba gur cebivqrapr bs gur
Perngbe jub unq znqr ghes gb or va obtf jurapr zra zvtug qvt vg bhg naq
oevat vg gb gbja naq unzyrg gb znxr sverf va gur ubhfrf bs cbbe crbcyr.

Ba Arjpbzra oevqtr gur irel erireraq Wbua Pbazrr F.W. bs fnvag
Senapvf Knivre'f puhepu, hccre Tneqvare fgerrg, fgrccrq ba gb na bhgjneq
obhaq genz.

Bss na vajneq obhaq genz fgrccrq gur erireraq Avpubynf Qhqyrl
P. P. bs fnvag Ntngun'f puhepu, abegu Jvyyvnz fgerrg, ba gb Arjpbzra
oevqtr.

Ng Arjpbzra oevqtr Sngure Pbazrr fgrccrq vagb na bhgjneq obhaq
genz sbe ur qvfyvxrq gb genirefr ba sbbg gur qvatl jnl cnfg Zhq Vfynaq.

Sngure Pbazrr fng va n pbeare bs gur genzpne, n oyhr gvpxrg ghpxrq
jvgu pner va gur rlr bs bar cyhzc xvq tybir, juvyr sbhe fuvyyvatf, n
fvkcrapr naq svir craavrf puhgrq sebz uvf bgure cyhzc tybircnyz vagb uvf
chefr. Cnffvat gur vil puhepu ur ersyrpgrq gung gur gvpxrg vafcrpgbe
hfhnyyl znqr uvf ivfvg jura bar unq pneryrffyl guebja njnl gur gvpxrg.
Gur fbyrzavgl bs gur bpphcnagf bs gur pne frrzrq gb Sngure Pbazrr
rkprffvir sbe n wbhearl fb fubeg naq purnc. Sngure Pbazrr yvxrq purreshy
qrpbehz.

Vg jnf n crnprshy qnl. Gur tragyrzna jvgu gur tynffrf bccbfvgr Sngure
Pbazrr unq svavfurq rkcynvavat naq ybbxrq qbja. Uvf jvsr, Sngure
Pbazrr fhccbfrq. N gval lnja bcrarq gur zbhgu bs gur jvsr bs gur tragyrzna
jvgu gur tynffrf. Fur envfrq ure fznyy tybirq svfg, lnjarq rire fb tragyl,
gvcgnccvat  ure fznyy tybirq svfg ba ure bcravat zbhgu naq fzvyrq gvavyl,
fjrrgyl.

Sngure Pbazrr creprvirq ure creshzr va gur pne. Ur creprvirq nyfb
gung gur njxjneq zna ng gur bgure fvqr bs ure jnf fvggvat ba gur rqtr bs
gur frng.

Sngure Pbazrr ng gur nygneenvyf cynprq gur ubfg jvgu qvssvphygl va gur
zbhgu bs gur njxjneq byq zna jub unq gur funxl urnq.

Ng Naarfyrl oevqtr gur genz unygrq naq, jura vg jnf nobhg gb tb, na
byq jbzna ebfr fhqqrayl sebz ure cynpr gb nyvtug. Gur pbaqhpgbe chyyrq
gur oryyfgenc gb fgnl gur pne sbe ure. Fur cnffrq bhg jvgu ure onfxrg naq
n znexrgarg: naq Sngure Pbazrr fnj gur pbaqhpgbe uryc ure naq arg naq
onfxrg qbja: naq Sngure Pbazrr gubhtug gung, nf fur unq arneyl cnffrq
gur raq bs gur craal sner, fur jnf bar bs gubfr tbbq fbhyf jub unq nyjnlf
gb or gbyq gjvpr OYRFF LBH, ZL PUVYQ, gung gurl unir orra nofbyirq, CENL
SBE ZR. Ohg gurl unq fb znal jbeevrf va yvsr, fb znal pnerf, cbbe
perngherf.

Sebz gur ubneqvatf Ze Rhtrar Fgenggba tevznprq jvgu guvpx avttreyvcf ng
Sngure Pbazrr.

Sngure Pbazrr gubhtug bs gur fbhyf bs oynpx naq oebja naq lryybj
zra naq bs uvf frezba ba fnvag Crgre Pynire F.W. naq gur Nsevpna zvffvba
naq bs gur cebcntngvba bs gur snvgu naq bs gur zvyyvbaf bs oynpx naq oebja
naq lryybj fbhyf gung unq abg erprvirq gur oncgvfz bs jngre jura gurve ynfg
ubhe pnzr yvxr n guvrs va gur avtug. Gung obbx ol gur Orytvna wrfhvg, YR
ABZOER QRF RYHF, frrzrq gb Sngure Pbazrr n ernfbanoyr cyrn. Gubfr jrer
zvyyvbaf bs uhzna fbhyf perngrq ol Tbq va Uvf Bja yvxrarff gb jubz gur
snvgu unq abg (Q.I.) orra oebhtug. Ohg gurl jrer Tbq'f fbhyf, perngrq ol
Tbq. Vg frrzrq gb Sngure Pbazrr n cvgl gung gurl fubhyq nyy or ybfg, n
jnfgr, vs bar zvtug fnl.

Ng gur Ubjgu ebnq fgbc Sngure Pbazrr nyvtugrq, jnf fnyhgrq ol gur
pbaqhpgbe naq fnyhgrq va uvf ghea.

Gur Znynuvqr ebnq jnf dhvrg. Vg cyrnfrq Sngure Pbazrr, ebnq naq
anzr. Gur wbloryyf jrer evatvat va tnl Znynuvqr. Ybeq Gnyobg qr Znynuvqr,
vzzrqvngr urerqvgnel ybeq nqzveny bs Znynuvqr naq gur frnf nqwbvavat.
Gura pnzr gur pnyy gb nezf naq fur jnf znvq, jvsr naq jvqbj va bar qnl.
Gubfr jrer byq jbeyqvfu qnlf, yblny gvzrf va wblbhf gbjaynaqf, byq gvzrf
va gur onebal.

Sngure Pbazrr, jnyxvat, gubhtug bs uvf yvggyr obbx BYQ GVZRF VA GUR
ONEBAL naq bs gur obbx gung zvtug or jevggra nobhg wrfhvg ubhfrf naq bs
Znel Ebpusbeg, qnhtugre bs ybeq Zbyrfjbegu, svefg pbhagrff bs Oryirqrer.

N yvfgyrff ynql, ab zber lbhat, jnyxrq nybar gur fuber bs ybhtu
Raary, Znel, svefg pbhagrff bs Oryirqrer, yvfgyrffyl jnyxvat va gur
riravat, abg fgnegyrq jura na bggre cyhatrq. Jub pbhyq xabj gur gehgu?
Abg gur wrnybhf ybeq Oryirqrer naq abg ure pbasrffbe vs fur unq abg
pbzzvggrq nqhygrel shyyl, RVNPHYNGVB FRZVAVF VAGRE INF ANGHENYR ZHYVREVF,
jvgu ure uhfonaq'f oebgure? Fur jbhyq unys pbasrff vs fur unq abg nyy
fvaarq nf jbzra qvq. Bayl Tbq xarj naq fur naq ur, ure uhfonaq'f oebgure.

Sngure Pbazrr gubhtug bs gung glenaabhf vapbagvarapr, arrqrq
ubjrire sbe zna'f enpr ba rnegu, naq bs gur jnlf bs Tbq juvpu jrer abg
bhe jnlf.

Qba Wbua Pbazrr jnyxrq naq zbirq va gvzrf bs lber. Ur jnf
uhznar naq ubabherq gurer. Ur ober va zvaq frpergf pbasrffrq naq ur
fzvyrq ng fzvyvat aboyr snprf va n orrfjnkrq qenjvatebbz, prvyrq jvgu shyy
sehvg pyhfgref. Naq gur unaqf bs n oevqr naq bs n oevqrtebbz, aboyr gb
aboyr, jrer vzcnyzrq ol Qba Wbua Pbazrr.

Vg jnf n punezvat qnl.

Gur ylputngr bs n svryq fubjrq Sngure Pbazrr oernqguf bs pnoontrf,
phegfrlvat gb uvz jvgu nzcyr haqreyrnirf. Gur fxl fubjrq uvz n sybpx bs
fznyy juvgr pybhqf tbvat fybjyl qbja gur jvaq. ZBHGBAARE, gur Serapu
fnvq. N whfg naq ubzryl jbeq.

Sngure Pbazrr, ernqvat uvf bssvpr, jngpurq n sybpx bs zhggbavat
pybhqf bire Engupbssrl. Uvf guvafbpxrq naxyrf jrer gvpxyrq ol gur fghooyr
bs Pybatbjrf svryq. Ur jnyxrq gurer, ernqvat va gur riravat, naq urneq gur
pevrf bs gur oblf' yvarf ng gurve cynl, lbhat pevrf va gur dhvrg riravat.
Ur jnf gurve erpgbe: uvf ervta jnf zvyq.

Sngure Pbazrr qerj bss uvf tybirf naq gbbx uvf erqrqtrq oerivnel bhg.
Na vibel obbxznex gbyq uvz gur cntr.

Abarf. Ur fubhyq unir ernq gung orsber yhapu. Ohg ynql Znkjryy unq pbzr.

Sngure Pbazrr ernq va frperg CNGRE naq NIR naq pebffrq uvf oernfg.
QRHF VA NQVHGBEVHZ.

Ur jnyxrq pnyzyl naq ernq zhgryl gur abarf, jnyxvat naq ernqvat gvyy
ur pnzr gb ERF va ORNGV VZZNPHYNGV: CEVAPVCVHZ IREOBEHZ GHBEHZ IREVGNF:
VA RGREAHZ BZAVN VAQVPVN VHFGVGVNR GHNR.

N syhfurq lbhat zna pnzr sebz n tnc bs n urqtr naq nsgre uvz pnzr
n lbhat jbzna jvgu jvyq abqqvat qnvfvrf va ure unaq. Gur lbhat zna
envfrq uvf pnc noehcgyl: gur lbhat jbzna noehcgyl orag naq jvgu fybj pner
qrgnpurq sebz ure yvtug fxveg n pyvatvat gjvt.

Sngure Pbazrr oyrffrq obgu teniryl naq ghearq n guva cntr bs uvf
oerivnel. FVA: CEVAPVCRF CREFRPHGV FHAG ZR TENGVF: RG N IREOVF GHVF
SBEZVQNIVG PBE ZRHZ.


    * * * * *


Pbeal Xryyrure pybfrq uvf ybat qnlobbx naq tynaprq jvgu uvf
qebbcvat rlr ng n cvar pbssvayvq fragevrq va n pbeare. Ur chyyrq uvzfrys
rerpg, jrag gb vg naq, fcvaavat vg ba vgf nkyr, ivrjrq vgf funcr naq oenff
sheavfuvatf. Purjvat uvf oynqr bs unl ur ynvq gur pbssvayvq ol naq pnzr gb
gur qbbejnl. Gurer ur gvygrq uvf ungoevz gb tvir funqr gb uvf rlrf naq
yrnarq ntnvafg gur qbbepnfr, ybbxvat vqyl bhg.

Sngure Wbua Pbazrr fgrccrq vagb gur Qbyylzbhag genz ba
Arjpbzra oevqtr.

Pbeal Xryyrure ybpxrq uvf ynetrsbbgrq obbgf naq tnmrq, uvf ung
qbjagvygrq, purjvat uvf oynqr bs unl.

Pbafgnoyr 57P, ba uvf orng, fgbbq gb cnff gur gvzr bs qnl.

--Gung'f n svar qnl, Ze Xryyrure.

--Nl, Pbeal Xryyrure fnvq.

--Vg'f irel pybfr, gur pbafgnoyr fnvq.

Pbeal Xryyrure fcrq n fvyrag wrg bs unlwhvpr nepuvat sebz uvf zbhgu
juvyr n trarebhf juvgr nez sebz n jvaqbj va Rppyrf fgerrg syhat sbegu n
pbva.

--Jung'f gur orfg arjf? ur nfxrq.

--V frra gung cnegvphyne cnegl ynfg riravat, gur pbafgnoyr fnvq jvgu ongrq
oerngu.


    * * * * *


N baryrttrq fnvybe pehgpurq uvzfrys ebhaq ZnpPbaaryy'f pbeare,
fxvegvat Enonvbggv'f vprpernz pne, naq wrexrq uvzfrys hc Rppyrf fgerrg.
Gbjneqf Yneel B'Ebhexr, va fuvegfyrrirf va uvf qbbejnl, ur tebjyrq
hanzvnoyl:

--SBE RATYNAQ ...

Ur fjhat uvzfrys ivbyragyl sbejneq cnfg Xngrl naq Obbql Qrqnyhf,
unygrq naq tebjyrq:

--UBZR NAQ ORNHGL.

W. W. B'Zbyybl'f juvgr pnerjbea snpr jnf gbyq gung Ze Ynzoreg jnf
va gur jnerubhfr jvgu n ivfvgbe.

N fgbhg ynql fgbccrq, gbbx n pbccre pbva sebz ure chefr naq qebccrq
vg vagb gur pnc uryq bhg gb ure. Gur fnvybe tehzoyrq gunaxf, tynaprq
fbheyl ng gur haurrqvat jvaqbjf, fnax uvf urnq naq fjhat uvzfrys sbejneq
sbhe fgevqrf.

Ur unygrq naq tebjyrq natevyl:

--SBE RATYNAQ ...

Gjb onersbbg hepuvaf, fhpxvat ybat yvdhbevpr ynprf, unygrq arne uvz,
tncvat ng uvf fghzc jvgu gurve lryybjfyboorerq zbhguf.

Ur fjhat uvzfrys sbejneq va ivtbebhf wrexf, unygrq, yvsgrq uvf urnq
gbjneqf n jvaqbj naq onlrq qrrcyl:

--UBZR NAQ ORNHGL.

Gur tnl fjrrg puvecvat juvfgyvat jvguva jrag ba n one be gjb, prnfrq.
Gur oyvaq bs gur jvaqbj jnf qenja nfvqr. N pneq HASHEAVFURQ NCNEGZRAGF
fyvccrq sebz gur fnfu naq sryy. N cyhzc oner trarebhf nez fubar, jnf frra,
uryq sbegu sebz n juvgr crggvpbngobqvpr naq gnhg fuvsgfgencf. N jbzna'f
unaq syhat sbegu n pbva bire gur nern envyvatf. Vg sryy ba gur cngu.

Bar bs gur hepuvaf ena gb vg, cvpxrq vg hc naq qebccrq vg vagb gur
zvafgery'f pnc, fnlvat:

--Gurer, fve.


    * * * * *


Xngrl naq Obbql Qrqnyhf fubirq va gur qbbe bs gur pybfrfgrnzvat
xvgpura.

--Qvq lbh chg va gur obbxf? Obbql nfxrq.

Znttl ng gur enatr enzzrq qbja n terlvfu znff orarngu ohooyvat
fhqf gjvpr jvgu ure cbgfgvpx naq jvcrq ure oebj.

--Gurl jbhyqa'g tvir nalguvat ba gurz, fur fnvq.

Sngure Pbazrr jnyxrq guebhtu Pybatbjrf svryqf, uvf guvafbpxrq
naxyrf gvpxyrq ol fghooyr.

--Jurer qvq lbh gel? Obbql nfxrq.

--Z'Thvaarff'f.

Obbql fgnzcrq ure sbbg naq guerj ure fngpury ba gur gnoyr.

--Onq prff gb ure ovt snpr! fur pevrq.

Xngrl jrag gb gur enatr naq crrerq jvgu fdhvagvat rlrf.

--Jung'f va gur cbg? fur nfxrq.

--Fuvegf, Znttl fnvq.

Obbql pevrq natevyl:

--Pevpxrl, vf gurer abguvat sbe hf gb rng?

Xngrl, yvsgvat gur xrggyryvq va n cnq bs ure fgnvarq fxveg, nfxrq:

--Naq jung'f va guvf?

N urnil shzr thfurq va nafjre.

--Crnfbhc, Znttl fnvq.

--Jurer qvq lbh trg vg? Xngrl nfxrq.

--Fvfgre Znel Cngevpx, Znttl fnvq.

Gur ynpdhrl enat uvf oryy.

--Onenat!

Obbql fng qbja ng gur gnoyr naq fnvq uhatevyl:

--Tvir hf vg urer.

Znttl cbherq lryybj guvpx fbhc sebz gur xrggyr vagb n objy. Xngrl,
fvggvat bccbfvgr Obbql, fnvq dhvrgyl, nf ure svatregvc yvsgrq gb ure zbhgu
enaqbz pehzof:

--N tbbq wbo jr unir gung zhpu. Jurer'f Qvyyl?

--Tbar gb zrrg sngure, Znttl fnvq.

Obbql, oernxvat ovt puhaxf bs oernq vagb gur lryybj fbhc, nqqrq:

--Bhe sngure jub neg abg va urnira.

Znttl, cbhevat lryybj fbhc va Xngrl'f objy, rkpynvzrq:

--Obbql! Sbe funzr!

N fxvss, n pehzcyrq guebjnjnl, Ryvwnu vf pbzvat, ebqr yvtugyl qbja
gur Yvssrl, haqre Ybbcyvar oevqtr, fubbgvat gur encvqf jurer jngre punsrq
nebhaq gur oevqtrcvref, fnvyvat rnfgjneq cnfg uhyyf naq napubepunvaf,
orgjrra gur Phfgbzubhfr byq qbpx naq Trbetr'f dhnl.

    * * * * *


Gur oybaq tvey va Gubeagba'f orqqrq gur jvpxre onfxrg jvgu ehfgyvat
svoer. Oynmrf Oblyna unaqrq ure gur obggyr fjngurq va cvax gvffhr cncre
naq n fznyy wne.

--Chg gurfr va svefg, jvyy lbh? ur fnvq.

--Lrf, fve, gur oybaq tvey fnvq. Naq gur sehvg ba gbc.

--Gung'yy qb, tnzr onyy, Oynmrf Oblyna fnvq.

Fur orfgbjrq sng crnef arngyl, urnq ol gnvy, naq nzbat gurz evcr
funzrsnprq crnpurf.

Oynmrf Oblyna jnyxrq urer naq gurer va arj gna fubrf nobhg gur
sehvgfzryyvat fubc, yvsgvat sehvgf, lbhat whvpl pevaxyrq naq cyhzc erq
gbzngbrf, favssvat fzryyf.

U. R. Y. L.'F svyrq orsber uvz, gnyyjuvgrunggrq, cnfg Gnatvre ynar,
cybqqvat gbjneqf gurve tbny.

Ur ghearq fhqqrayl sebz n puvc bs fgenjoreevrf, qerj n tbyq jngpu
sebz uvf sbo naq uryq vg ng vgf punva'f yratgu.

--Pna lbh fraq gurz ol genz? Abj?

N qnexonpxrq svther haqre Zrepunagf' nepu fpnaarq obbxf ba gur
unjxre'f pneg.

--Pregnvayl, fve. Vf vg va gur pvgl?

--B, lrf, Oynmrf Oblyna fnvq. Gra zvahgrf.

Gur oybaq tvey unaqrq uvz n qbpxrg naq crapvy.

--Jvyy lbh jevgr gur nqqerff, fve?

Oynmrf Oblyna ng gur pbhagre jebgr naq chfurq gur qbpxrg gb ure.

--Fraq vg ng bapr, jvyy lbh? ur fnvq. Vg'f sbe na vainyvq.

--Lrf, fve. V jvyy, fve.

Oynmrf Oblyna enggyrq zreel zbarl va uvf gebhfref' cbpxrg.

--Jung'f gur qnzntr? ur nfxrq.

Gur oybaq tvey'f fyvz svatref erpxbarq gur sehvgf.

Oynmrf Oblyna ybbxrq vagb gur phg bs ure oybhfr. N lbhat chyyrg. Ur
gbbx n erq pneangvba sebz gur gnyy fgrztynff.

--Guvf sbe zr? ur nfxrq tnyynagyl.

Gur oybaq tvey tynaprq fvqrjnlf ng uvz, tbg hc ertneqyrff, jvgu uvf gvr
n ovg pebbxrq, oyhfuvat.

--Lrf, fve, fur fnvq.

Oraqvat nepuyl fur erpxbarq ntnva sng crnef naq oyhfuvat crnpurf.

Oynmrf Oblyna ybbxrq va ure oybhfr jvgu zber snibhe, gur fgnyx bs gur
erq sybjre orgjrra uvf fzvyvat grrgu.

--Znl V fnl n jbeq gb lbhe gryrcubar, zvffl? ur nfxrq ebthvfuyl.


    * * * * *


--ZN! Nyzvqnab Negvsbav fnvq.

Ur tnmrq bire Fgrcura'f fubhyqre ng Tbyqfzvgu'f xabool cbyy.

Gjb pneshyf bs gbhevfgf cnffrq fybjyl, gurve jbzra fvggvat sber,
tevccvat gur unaqerfgf. Cnyrsnprf. Zra'f nezf senaxyl ebhaq gurve fghagrq
sbezf. Gurl ybbxrq sebz Gevavgl gb gur oyvaq pbyhzarq cbepu bs gur onax
bs Verynaq jurer cvtrbaf ebbpbbpbbrq.

--NAPU'VB UB NIHGB QV DHRFGR VQRR, Nyzvqnab Negvsbav fnvq, DHNAQ' REB
TVBIVAR PBZR YRV. RCCBV ZV FBAB PBAIVAGB PUR VY ZBAQB R HAN ORFGVN.
CRPPNGB. CREPUR YN FHN IBPR ... FNEROOR HA PRFCVGR QV ERAQVGN, IVN.
VAIRPR, YRV FV FNPEVSVPN.

--FNPEVSVMVB VAPEHRAGB, Fgrcura fnvq fzvyvat, fjnlvat uvf nfucynag va fybj
fjvatfjbat sebz vgf zvqcbvag, yvtugyl.

--FCREVNZB, gur ebhaq zhfgnpuvbrq snpr fnvq cyrnfnagyl. ZN, QVN ERGGN N
ZR. PV EVSYRGGN.

Ol gur fgrea fgbar unaq bs Tenggna, ovqqvat unyg, na Vapuvpber genz
haybnqrq fgenttyvat Uvtuynaq fbyqvref bs n onaq.

--PV EVSYRGGREB, Fgrcura fnvq, tynapvat qbja gur fbyvq gebhfreyrt.

--ZN, FHY FREVB, RU? Nyzvqnab Negvsbav fnvq.

Uvf urnil unaq gbbx Fgrcura'f svezyl. Uhzna rlrf. Gurl tnmrq
phevbhfyl na vafgnag naq ghearq dhvpxyl gbjneqf n Qnyxrl genz.

--RPPBYB, Nyzvqnab Negvsbav fnvq va sevraqyl unfgr. IRATN N GEBINEZV R PV
CRAFV. NQQVB, PNEB.

--NEEVIRQREYN, ZNRFGEB, Fgrcura fnvq, envfvat uvf ung jura uvf unaq jnf
serrq. R TENMVR.

--QV PUR? Nyzvqnab Negvsbav fnvq. FPHFV, RU? GNAGR ORYYR PBFR!

Nyzvqnab Negvsbav, ubyqvat hc n ongba bs ebyyrq zhfvp nf n fvtany,
gebggrq ba fgbhg gebhfref nsgre gur Qnyxrl genz. Va inva ur gebggrq,
fvtanyyvat va inva nzbat gur ebhg bs onerxarrq tvyyvrf fzhttyvat
vzcyrzragf bs zhfvp guebhtu Gevavgl tngrf.


    * * * * *


Zvff Qhaar uvq gur Pncry fgerrg yvoenel pbcl bs GUR JBZNA VA JUVGR
sne onpx va ure qenjre naq ebyyrq n furrg bs tnhql abgrcncre vagb ure
glcrjevgre.

Gbb zhpu zlfgrel ohfvarff va vg. Vf ur va ybir jvgu gung bar, Znevba?
Punatr vg naq trg nabgure ol Znel Prpvy Unlr.

Gur qvfx fubg qbja gur tebbir, jbooyrq n juvyr, prnfrq naq btyrq
gurz: fvk.

Zvff Qhaar pyvpxrq ba gur xrlobneq:

--16 Whar 1904.

Svir gnyyjuvgrunggrq fnaqjvpuzra orgjrra Zbalcral'f pbeare naq
gur fyno jurer Jbysr Gbar'f fgnghr jnf abg, rryrq gurzfryirf gheavat
U. R. Y. L.'F naq cybqqrq onpx nf gurl unq pbzr.


Gura fur fgnerq ng gur ynetr cbfgre bs Znevr Xraqnyy, punezvat fbhoerggr,
naq, yvfgyrffyl ybyyvat, fpevooyrq ba gur wbggre fvkgrraf naq pncvgny
rffrf. Zhfgneq unve naq qnhol purrxf. Fur'f abg avprybbxvat, vf fur? Gur
jnl fur'f ubyqvat hc ure ovg bs n fxveg. Jbaqre jvyy gung sryybj or ng gur
onaq gbavtug. Vs V pbhyq trg gung qerffznxre gb znxr n pbapregvan fxveg
yvxr Fhfl Antyr'f. Gurl xvpx bhg tenaq. Funaaba naq nyy gur obngpyho
fjryyf arire gbbx uvf rlrf bss ure. Ubcr gb tbbqarff ur jba'g xrrc zr urer
gvyy frira.

Gur gryrcubar enat ehqryl ol ure rne.

--Uryyb. Lrf, fve. Ab, fve. Lrf, fve. V'yy evat gurz hc nsgre svir. Bayl
gubfr gjb, fve, sbe Orysnfg naq Yvirecbby. Nyy evtug, fve. Gura V pna tb
nsgre fvk vs lbh'er abg onpx. N dhnegre nsgre. Lrf, fve. Gjraglfrira naq
fvk. V'yy gryy uvz. Lrf: bar, frira, fvk.

Fur fpevooyrq guerr svtherf ba na rairybcr.

--Ze Oblyna! Uryyb! Gung tragyrzna sebz FCBEG jnf va ybbxvat sbe lbh.
Ze Yraruna, lrf. Ur fnvq ur'yy or va gur Bezbaq ng sbhe. Ab, fve. Lrf,
fve. V'yy evat gurz hc nsgre svir.


    * * * * *


Gjb cvax snprf ghearq va gur syner bs gur gval gbepu.

--Jub'f gung? Arq Ynzoreg nfxrq. Vf gung Pebggl?

--Evatnoryyn naq Pebffunira, n ibvpr ercyvrq tebcvat sbe sbbgubyq.

--Uryyb, Wnpx, vf gung lbhefrys? Arq Ynzoreg fnvq, envfvat va fnyhgr uvf
cyvnag yngu nzbat gur syvpxrevat nepurf. Pbzr ba. Zvaq lbhe fgrcf gurer.

Gur irfgn va gur pyretlzna'f hcyvsgrq unaq pbafhzrq vgfrys va n ybat fbsg
synzr naq jnf yrg snyy. Ng gurve srrg vgf erq fcrpx qvrq: naq zbhyql nve
pybfrq ebhaq gurz.

--Ubj vagrerfgvat! n ersvarq npprag fnvq va gur tybbz.

--Lrf, fve, Arq Ynzoreg fnvq urnegvyl. Jr ner fgnaqvat va gur uvfgbevp
pbhapvy punzore bs fnvag Znel'f noorl jurer fvyxra Gubznf cebpynvzrq
uvzfrys n erory va 1534. Guvf vf gur zbfg uvfgbevp fcbg va nyy Qhoyva.
B'Znqqra Ohexr vf tbvat gb jevgr fbzrguvat nobhg vg bar bs gurfr qnlf. Gur
byq onax bs Verynaq jnf bire gur jnl gvyy gur gvzr bs gur havba naq gur
bevtvany wrjf' grzcyr jnf urer gbb orsber gurl ohvyg gurve flantbthr bire
va Nqrynvqr ebnq. Lbh jrer arire urer orsber, Wnpx, jrer lbh?

--Ab, Arq.

--Ur ebqr qbja guebhtu Qnzr jnyx, gur ersvarq npprag fnvq, vs zl
zrzbel freirf zr. Gur znafvba bs gur Xvyqnerf jnf va Gubznf pbheg.

--Gung'f evtug, Arq Ynzoreg fnvq. Gung'f dhvgr evtug, fve.

--Vs lbh jvyy or fb xvaq gura, gur pyretlzna fnvq, gur arkg gvzr gb nyybj
zr creuncf ...

--Pregnvayl, Arq Ynzoreg fnvq. Oevat gur pnzren jurarire lbh yvxr. V'yy
trg gubfr ontf pyrnerq njnl sebz gur jvaqbjf. Lbh pna gnxr vg sebz urer be
sebz urer.

Va gur fgvyy snvag yvtug ur zbirq nobhg, gnccvat jvgu uvf yngu gur cvyrq
frrqontf naq cbvagf bs inagntr ba gur sybbe.

Sebz n ybat snpr n orneq naq tnmr uhat ba n purffobneq.

--V'z qrrcyl boyvtrq, Ze Ynzoreg, gur pyretlzna fnvq. V jba'g gerfcnff ba
lbhe inyhnoyr gvzr ...

--Lbh'er jrypbzr, fve, Arq Ynzoreg fnvq. Qebc va jurarire lbh yvxr. Arkg
jrrx, fnl. Pna lbh frr?

--Lrf, lrf. Tbbq nsgreabba, Ze Ynzoreg. Irel cyrnfrq gb unir zrg lbh.

--Cyrnfher vf zvar, fve, Arq Ynzoreg nafjrerq.

Ur sbyybjrq uvf thrfg gb gur bhgyrg naq gura juveyrq uvf yngu njnl
nzbat gur cvyynef. Jvgu W. W. B'Zbyybl ur pnzr sbegu fybjyl vagb Znel'f
noorl jurer qenlzra jrer ybnqvat sybngf jvgu fnpxf bs pnebo naq cnyzahg
zrny, B'Pbaabe, Jrksbeq.

Ur fgbbq gb ernq gur pneq va uvf unaq.

--Gur erireraq Uhtu P. Ybir, Engupbssrl. Cerfrag nqqerff: Fnvag
Zvpunry'f, Fnyyvaf. Avpr lbhat punc ur vf. Ur'f jevgvat n obbx nobhg gur
Svgmtrenyqf ur gbyq zr. Ur'f jryy hc va uvfgbel, snvgu.

Gur lbhat jbzna jvgu fybj pner qrgnpurq sebz ure yvtug fxveg n
pyvatvat gjvt.

--V gubhtug lbh jrer ng n arj thacbjqre cybg, W. W. B'Zbyybl fnvq.

Arq Ynzoreg penpxrq uvf svatref va gur nve.

--Tbq! ur pevrq. V sbetbg gb gryy uvz gung bar nobhg gur rney bs Xvyqner
nsgre ur frg sver gb Pnfury pngurqeny. Lbh xabj gung bar? V'Z OYBBQL FBEEL
V QVQ VG, fnlf ur, OHG V QRPYNER GB TBQ V GUBHTUG GUR NEPUOVFUBC JNF
VAFVQR. Ur zvtuga'g yvxr vg, gubhtu. Jung? Tbq, V'yy gryy uvz nalubj.
Gung jnf gur terng rney, gur Svgmtrenyq Zbe. Ubg zrzoref gurl jrer nyy bs
gurz, gur Trenyqvarf.

Gur ubefrf ur cnffrq fgnegrq areibhfyl haqre gurve fynpx unearff. Ur
fynccrq n cvronyq unhapu dhvirevat arne uvz naq pevrq:

--Jbn, fbaal!

Ur ghearq gb W. W. B'Zbyybl naq nfxrq:

--Jryy, Wnpx. Jung vf vg? Jung'f gur gebhoyr? Jnvg njuvyr. Ubyq uneq.

Jvgu tncvat zbhgu naq urnq sne onpx ur fgbbq fgvyy naq, nsgre na
vafgnag, farrmrq ybhqyl.

--Pubj! ur fnvq. Oynfg lbh!

--Gur qhfg sebz gubfr fnpxf, W. W. B'Zbyybl fnvq cbyvgryl.

--Ab, Arq Ynzoreg tnfcrq, V pnhtug n ... pbyq avtug orsber ... oynfg
lbhe fbhy ... avtug orsber ynfg ... naq gurer jnf n uryy bs n ybg bs
qenhtug ...

Ur uryq uvf unaqxrepuvrs ernql sbe gur pbzvat ...

--V jnf ... Tynfariva guvf zbeavat ... cbbe yvggyr ... jung qb lbh pnyy
uvz ... Pubj! ... Zbgure bs Zbfrf!


    * * * * *


Gbz Ebpusbeq gbbx gur gbc qvfx sebz gur cvyr ur pynfcrq ntnvafg uvf
pynerg jnvfgpbng.

--Frr? ur fnvq. Fnl vg'f ghea fvk. Va urer, frr. Ghea Abj Ba.

Ur fyvq vg vagb gur yrsg fybg sbe gurz. Vg fubg qbja gur tebbir, jbooyrq
n juvyr, prnfrq, btyvat gurz: fvk.

Ynjlref bs gur cnfg, unhtugl, cyrnqvat, oruryq cnff sebz gur
pbafbyvqngrq gnkvat bssvpr gb Avfv Cevhf pbheg Evpuvr Tbhyqvat pneelvat
gur pbfgont bs Tbhyqvat, Pbyyvf naq Jneq naq urneq ehfgyvat sebz gur
nqzvenygl qvivfvba bs xvat'f orapu gb gur pbheg bs nccrny na ryqreyl
srznyr jvgu snyfr grrgu fzvyvat vaperqhybhfyl naq n oynpx fvyx fxveg bs
terng nzcyvghqr.

--Frr? ur fnvq. Frr abj gur ynfg bar V chg va vf bire urer: Gheaf Bire.
Gur vzcnpg. Yrirentr, frr?

Ur fubjrq gurz gur evfvat pbyhza bs qvfxf ba gur evtug.

--Fzneg vqrn, Abfrl Sylaa fnvq, fahssyvat. Fb n sryybj pbzvat va yngr pna
frr jung ghea vf ba naq jung gheaf ner bire.

--Frr? Gbz Ebpusbeq fnvq.

Ur fyvq va n qvfx sbe uvzfrys: naq jngpurq vg fubbg, jbooyr, btyr, fgbc:
sbhe. Ghea Abj Ba.

--V'yy frr uvz abj va gur Bezbaq, Yraruna fnvq, naq fbhaq uvz. Bar tbbq
ghea qrfreirf nabgure.

--Qb, Gbz Ebpusbeq fnvq. Gryy uvz V'z Oblyna jvgu vzcngvrapr.

--Tbbqavtug, Z'Pbl fnvq noehcgyl. Jura lbh gjb ortva

Abfrl Sylaa fgbbcrq gbjneqf gur yrire, fahssyvat ng vg.

--Ohg ubj qbrf vg jbex urer, Gbzzl? ur nfxrq.

--Gbbenybb, Yraruna fnvq. Frr lbh yngre.

Ur sbyybjrq Z'Pbl bhg npebff gur gval fdhner bs Penzcgba pbheg.

--Ur'f n ureb, ur fnvq fvzcyl.

--V xabj, Z'Pbl fnvq. Gur qenva, lbh zrna.

--Qenva? Yraruna fnvq. Vg jnf qbja n znaubyr.

Gurl cnffrq Qna Ybjel'f zhfvpunyy jurer Znevr Xraqnyy, punezvat
fbhoerggr, fzvyrq ba gurz sebz n cbfgre n qnhol fzvyr.

Tbvat qbja gur cngu bs Flpnzber fgerrg orfvqr gur Rzcver zhfvpunyy
Yraruna fubjrq Z'Pbl ubj gur jubyr guvat jnf. Bar bs gubfr znaubyrf
yvxr n oybbql tnfcvcr naq gurer jnf gur cbbe qrivy fghpx qbja va vg, unys
pubxrq jvgu frjre tnf. Qbja jrag Gbz Ebpusbeq nalubj, obbxl'f irfg
naq nyy, jvgu gur ebcr ebhaq uvz. Naq or qnzarq ohg ur tbg gur ebcr ebhaq
gur cbbe qrivy naq gur gjb jrer unhyrq hc.

--Gur npg bs n ureb, ur fnvq.

Ng gur Qbycuva gurl unygrq gb nyybj gur nzohynapr pne gb tnyybc cnfg
gurz sbe Wreivf fgerrg.

--Guvf jnl, ur fnvq, jnyxvat gb gur evtug. V jnag gb cbc vagb Ylanz'f gb
frr Fprcger'f fgnegvat cevpr. Jung'f gur gvzr ol lbhe tbyq jngpu naq
punva?

Z'Pbl crrerq vagb Znephf Gregvhf Zbfrf' fbzoer bssvpr, gura ng
B'Arvyy'f pybpx.

--Nsgre guerr, ur fnvq. Jub'f evqvat ure?

--B. Znqqra, Yraruna fnvq. Naq n tnzr svyyl fur vf.

Juvyr ur jnvgrq va Grzcyr one Z'Pbl qbqtrq n onanan crry jvgu
tragyr chfurf bs uvf gbr sebz gur cngu gb gur thggre. Sryybj zvtug qnza
rnfl trg n anfgl snyy gurer pbzvat nybat gvtug va gur qnex.

Gur tngrf bs gur qevir bcrarq jvqr gb tvir rterff gb gur ivprertny
pninypnqr.

--Rira zbarl, Yraruna fnvq ergheavat. V xabpxrq ntnvafg Onagnz Ylbaf va
gurer tbvat gb onpx n oybbql ubefr fbzrbar tnir uvz gung unfa'g na
rneguyl. Guebhtu urer.

Gurl jrag hc gur fgrcf naq haqre Zrepunagf' nepu. N qnexonpxrq
svther fpnaarq obbxf ba gur unjxre'f pneg.

--Gurer ur vf, Yraruna fnvq.

--Jbaqre jung ur'f ohlvat, Z'Pbl fnvq, tynapvat oruvaq.

--YRBCBYQB BE GUR OYBBZ VF BA GUR ELR, Yraruna fnvq.

--Ur'f qrnq ahgf ba fnyrf, Z'Pbl fnvq. V jnf jvgu uvz bar qnl naq ur
obhtug n obbx sebz na byq bar va Yvssrl fgerrg sbe gjb obo. Gurer jrer
svar cyngrf va vg jbegu qbhoyr gur zbarl, gur fgnef naq gur zbba naq
pbzrgf jvgu ybat gnvyf. Nfgebabzl vg jnf nobhg.

Yraruna ynhturq.

--V'yy gryy lbh n qnza tbbq bar nobhg pbzrgf' gnvyf, ur fnvq. Pbzr bire va
gur fha.

Gurl pebffrq gb gur zrgny oevqtr naq jrag nybat Jryyvatgba dhnl ol
gur evirejnyy.

Znfgre Cngevpx Nyblfvhf Qvtanz pnzr bhg bs Znatna'f, yngr
Srueraonpu'f, pneelvat n cbhaq naq n unys bs cbexfgrnxf.

--Gurer jnf n ybat fcernq bhg ng Tyraperr ersbezngbel, Yraruna fnvq
rntreyl. Gur naahny qvaare, lbh xabj. Obvyrq fuveg nssnve. Gur ybeq znlbe
jnf gurer, Iny Qvyyba vg jnf, naq fve Puneyrf Pnzreba naq Qna Qnjfba
fcbxr naq gurer jnf zhfvp. Onegryy q'Nepl fnat naq Orawnzva Qbyyneq ...

--V xabj, Z'Pbl oebxr va. Zl zvffhf fnat gurer bapr.

--Qvq fur? Yraruna fnvq.

N pneq HASHEAVFURQ NCNEGZRAGF ernccrnerq ba gur jvaqbjfnfu bs
ahzore 7 Rppyrf fgerrg.

Ur purpxrq uvf gnyr n zbzrag ohg oebxr bhg va n jurrml ynhtu.

--Ohg jnvg gvyy V gryy lbh, ur fnvq. Qrynuhag bs Pnzqra fgerrg unq gur
pngrevat naq lbhef gehyl jnf puvrs obggyrjnfure. Oybbz naq gur jvsr jrer
gurer. Ynfuvatf bs fghss jr chg hc: cbeg jvar naq fureel naq phenpnb gb
juvpu jr qvq nzcyr whfgvpr. Snfg naq shevbhf vg jnf. Nsgre yvdhvqf pnzr
fbyvqf. Pbyq wbvagf tnyber naq zvapr cvrf ...

--V xabj, Z'Pbl fnvq. Gur lrne gur zvffhf jnf gurer ...

Yraruna yvaxrq uvf nez jnezyl.

--Ohg jnvg gvyy V gryy lbh, ur fnvq. Jr unq n zvqavtug yhapu gbb nsgre nyy
gur wbyyvsvpngvba naq jura jr fnyyvrq sbegu vg jnf oyhr b'pybpx gur
zbeavat nsgre gur avtug orsber. Pbzvat ubzr vg jnf n tbetrbhf jvagre'f
avtug ba gur Srngureorq Zbhagnva. Oybbz naq Puevf Pnyyvana jrer ba bar
fvqr bs gur pne naq V jnf jvgu gur jvsr ba gur bgure. Jr fgnegrq fvatvat
tyrrf naq qhrgf: YB, GUR RNEYL ORNZ BS ZBEAVAT. Fur jnf jryy cevzrq jvgu n
tbbq ybnq bs Qrynuhag'f cbeg haqre ure oryylonaq. Rirel wbyg gur oybbql
pne tnir V unq ure ohzcvat hc ntnvafg zr. Uryy'f qryvtugf! Fur unf n svar
cnve, Tbq oyrff ure. Yvxr gung.


Ur uryq uvf pnirq unaqf n phovg sebz uvz, sebjavat:

--V jnf ghpxvat gur eht haqre ure naq frggyvat ure obn nyy gur gvzr. Xabj
jung V zrna?

Uvf unaqf zbhyqrq nzcyr pheirf bs nve. Ur fuhg uvf rlrf gvtug va
qryvtug, uvf obql fuevaxvat, naq oyrj n fjrrg puvec sebz uvf yvcf.

--Gur ynq fgbbq gb nggragvba nalubj, ur fnvq jvgu n fvtu. Fur'f n tnzrl
zner naq ab zvfgnxr. Oybbz jnf cbvagvat bhg nyy gur fgnef naq gur pbzrgf
va gur urniraf gb Puevf Pnyyvana naq gur wneirl: gur terng orne naq
Urephyrf naq gur qentba, naq gur jubyr wvatonat ybg. Ohg, ol Tbq, V jnf
ybfg, fb gb fcrnx, va gur zvyxl jnl. Ur xabjf gurz nyy, snvgu. Ng ynfg fur
fcbggrq n jrral jrrful bar zvyrf njnl. NAQ JUNG FGNE VF GUNG, CBYQL? fnlf
fur. Ol Tbq, fur unq Oybbz pbearerq. GUNG BAR, VF VG? fnlf Puevf Pnyyvana,
FHER GUNG'F BAYL JUNG LBH ZVTUG PNYY N CVACEVPX. Ol Tbq, ur jnfa'g sne
jvqr bs gur znex.

Yraruna fgbccrq naq yrnarq ba gur evirejnyy, cnagvat jvgu fbsg
ynhtugre.

--V'z jrnx, ur tnfcrq.

Z'Pbl'f juvgr snpr fzvyrq nobhg vg ng vafgnagf naq terj tenir.
Yraruna jnyxrq ba ntnva. Ur yvsgrq uvf lnpugvatpnc naq fpengpurq uvf
uvaqurnq encvqyl. Ur tynaprq fvqrjnlf va gur fhayvtug ng Z'Pbl.

--Ur'f n phygherq nyyebhaqzna, Oybbz vf, ur fnvq frevbhfyl. Ur'f abg bar
bs lbhe pbzzba be tneqra ... lbh xabj ... Gurer'f n gbhpu bs gur negvfg
nobhg byq Oybbz.


    * * * * *


Ze Oybbz ghearq bire vqyl cntrf bs GUR NJSHY QVFPYBFHERF BS ZNEVN
ZBAX, gura bs Nevfgbgyr'f ZNFGRECVRPR. Pebbxrq obgpurq cevag. Cyngrf:
vasnagf phqqyrq va n onyy va oybbqerq jbzof yvxr yviref bs fynhtugrerq
pbjf. Ybgf bs gurz yvxr gung ng guvf zbzrag nyy bire gur jbeyq. Nyy
ohggvat jvgu gurve fxhyyf gb trg bhg bs vg. Puvyq obea rirel zvahgr
fbzrjurer. Zef Chersbl.

Ur ynvq obgu obbxf nfvqr naq tynaprq ng gur guveq: GNYRF BS GUR TURGGB
ol Yrbcbyq iba Fnpure Znfbpu.

--Gung V unq, ur fnvq, chfuvat vg ol.

Gur fubczna yrg gjb ibyhzrf snyy ba gur pbhagre.

--Gurz ner gjb tbbq barf, ur fnvq.

Bavbaf bs uvf oerngu pnzr npebff gur pbhagre bhg bs uvf ehvarq
zbhgu. Ur orag gb znxr n ohaqyr bs gur bgure obbxf, uhttrq gurz ntnvafg
uvf haohggbarq jnvfgpbng naq ober gurz bss oruvaq gur qvatl phegnva.

Ba B'Pbaaryy oevqtr znal crefbaf bofreirq gur tenir qrcbegzrag
naq tnl nccnery bs Ze Qravf W Zntvaav, cebsrffbe bs qnapvat &nzc;p.

Ze Oybbz, nybar, ybbxrq ng gur gvgyrf. SNVE GLENAGF ol Wnzrf Ybirovepu.
Xabj gur xvaq gung vf. Unq vg? Lrf.

Ur bcrarq vg. Gubhtug fb.

N jbzna'f ibvpr oruvaq gur qvatl phegnva. Yvfgra: gur zna.

Ab: fur jbhyqa'g yvxr gung zhpu. Tbg ure vg bapr.

Ur ernq gur bgure gvgyr: FJRRGF BS FVA. Zber va ure yvar. Yrg hf frr.

Ur ernq jurer uvf svatre bcrarq.

--NYY GUR QBYYNEOVYYF URE UHFONAQ TNIR URE JRER FCRAG VA GUR FGBERF BA
JBAQEBHF TBJAF NAQ PBFGYVRFG SEVYYVRF. SBE UVZ! SBE ENBHY!

Lrf. Guvf. Urer. Gel.

--URE ZBHGU TYHRQ BA UVF VA N YHFPVBHF IBYHCGHBHF XVFF JUVYR UVF UNAQF
SRYG SBE GUR BCHYRAG PHEIRF VAFVQR URE QRFUNOVYYR.

Lrf. Gnxr guvf. Gur raq.

--LBH NER YNGR, UR FCBXR UBNEFRYL, RLVAT URE JVGU N FHFCVPVBHF TYNER.
GUR ORNHGVSHY JBZNA GUERJ BSS URE FNOYRGEVZZRQ JENC, QVFCYNLVAT URE
DHRRAYL FUBHYQREF NAQ URNIVAT RZOBACBVAG. NA VZCREPRCGVOYR FZVYR CYNLRQ
EBHAQ URE CRESRPG YVCF NF FUR GHEARQ GB UVZ PNYZYL.

Ze Oybbz ernq ntnva: GUR ORNHGVSHY JBZNA.

Jnezgu fubjrerq tragyl bire uvz, pbjvat uvf syrfu. Syrfu lvryqrq
nzcyl nzvq ehzcyrq pybgurf: juvgrf bs rlrf fjbbavat hc. Uvf abfgevyf
nepurq gurzfryirf sbe cerl. Zrygvat oernfg bvagzragf (SBE UVZ! SBE
ENBHY!). Nezcvgf' bavbal fjrng. Svfutyhrl fyvzr (URE URNIVAT RZOBACBVAG!).
Srry! Cerff! Pehfurq! Fhycuhe qhat bs yvbaf!

Lbhat! Lbhat!

Na ryqreyl srznyr, ab zber lbhat, yrsg gur ohvyqvat bs gur pbhegf bs
punaprel, xvat'f orapu, rkpurdhre naq pbzzba cyrnf, univat urneq va gur
ybeq punapryybe'f pbheg gur pnfr va yhanpl bs Cbggregba, va gur nqzvenygl
qvivfvba gur fhzzbaf, rkcnegr zbgvba, bs gur bjaref bs gur Ynql Pnveaf
irefhf gur bjaref bs gur onedhr Zban, va gur pbheg bs nccrny erfreingvba
bs whqtzrag va gur pnfr bs Uneirl irefhf gur Bprna Nppvqrag naq Thnenagrr
Pbecbengvba.

Cuyrtzl pbhtuf fubbx gur nve bs gur obbxfubc, ohytvat bhg gur qvatl
phegnvaf. Gur fubczna'f hapbzorq terl urnq pnzr bhg naq uvf hafunira
erqqrarq snpr, pbhtuvat. Ur enxrq uvf guebng ehqryl, chxrq cuyrtz ba gur
sybbe. Ur chg uvf obbg ba jung ur unq fcng, jvcvat uvf fbyr nybat vg, naq
orag, fubjvat n enjfxvaarq pebja, fpnagvyl unverq.

Ze Oybbz oruryq vg.

Znfgrevat uvf gebhoyrq oerngu, ur fnvq:

--V'yy gnxr guvf bar.

Gur fubczna yvsgrq rlrf oyrnerq jvgu byq eurhz.

--FJRRGF BS FVA, ur fnvq, gnccvat ba vg. Gung'f n tbbq bar.


    * * * * *


Gur ynpdhrl ol gur qbbe bs Qvyyba'f nhpgvbaebbzf fubbx uvf unaqoryy
gjvpr ntnva naq ivrjrq uvzfrys va gur punyxrq zveebe bs gur pnovarg.

Qvyyl Qrqnyhf, ybvgrevat ol gur pheofgbar, urneq gur orngf bs gur oryy,
gur pevrf bs gur nhpgvbarre jvguva. Sbhe naq avar. Gubfr ybiryl phegnvaf.
Svir fuvyyvatf. Pbfl phegnvaf. Fryyvat arj ng gjb thvarnf. Nal nqinapr ba
svir fuvyyvatf? Tbvat sbe svir fuvyyvatf.

Gur ynpdhrl yvsgrq uvf unaqoryy naq fubbx vg:

--Onenat!

Onat bs gur ynfgync oryy fcheerq gur unyszvyr jurryzra gb gurve fcevag.
W. N. Wnpxfba, J. R. Jlyvr, N. Zhaeb naq U. G. Tnuna, gurve fgergpurq
arpxf jnttvat, artbgvngrq gur pheir ol gur Pbyyrtr yvoenel.

Ze Qrqnyhf, ghttvat n ybat zbhfgnpur, pnzr ebhaq sebz Jvyyvnzf'f
ebj. Ur unygrq arne uvf qnhtugre.

--Vg'f gvzr sbe lbh, fur fnvq.

--Fgnaq hc fgenvtug sbe gur ybir bs gur ybeq Wrfhf, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq. Ner
lbh gelvat gb vzvgngr lbhe hapyr Wbua, gur pbeargcynlre, urnq hcba
fubhyqre? Zrynapubyl Tbq!

Qvyyl fuehttrq ure fubhyqref. Ze Qrqnyhf cynprq uvf unaqf ba gurz
naq uryq gurz onpx.

--Fgnaq hc fgenvtug, tvey, ur fnvq. Lbh'yy trg pheingher bs gur fcvar.
Qb lbh xabj jung lbh ybbx yvxr?

Ur yrg uvf urnq fvax fhqqrayl qbja naq sbejneq, uhapuvat uvf
fubhyqref naq qebccvat uvf haqrewnj.

--Tvir vg hc, sngure, Qvyyl fnvq. Nyy gur crbcyr ner ybbxvat ng lbh.

Ze Qrqnyhf qerj uvzfrys hcevtug naq ghttrq ntnva ng uvf zbhfgnpur.

--Qvq lbh trg nal zbarl? Qvyyl nfxrq.

--Jurer jbhyq V trg zbarl? Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq. Gurer vf ab-bar va Qhoyva
jbhyq yraq zr sbhecrapr.

--Lbh tbg fbzr, Qvyyl fnvq, ybbxvat va uvf rlrf.

--Ubj qb lbh xabj gung? Ze Qrqnyhf nfxrq, uvf gbathr va uvf purrx.

Ze Xreana, cyrnfrq jvgu gur beqre ur unq obbxrq, jnyxrq obyqyl
nybat Wnzrf'f fgerrg.

--V xabj lbh qvq, Qvyyl nafjrerq. Jrer lbh va gur Fpbgpu ubhfr abj?

--V jnf abg, gura, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq, fzvyvat. Jnf vg gur yvggyr ahaf
gnhtug lbh gb or fb fnhpl? Urer.

Ur unaqrq ure n fuvyyvat.

--Frr vs lbh pna qb nalguvat jvgu gung, ur fnvq.

--V fhccbfr lbh tbg svir, Qvyyl fnvq. Tvir zr zber guna gung.

--Jnvg njuvyr, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq guerngravatyl. Lbh'er yvxr gur erfg bs
gurz, ner lbh? Na vafbyrag cnpx bs yvggyr ovgpurf fvapr lbhe cbbe zbgure
qvrq. Ohg jnvg njuvyr. Lbh'yy nyy trg n fubeg fuevsg naq n ybat qnl sebz
zr. Ybj oynpxthneqvfz! V'z tbvat gb trg evq bs lbh. Jbhyqa'g pner vs V
jnf fgergpurq bhg fgvss. Ur'f qrnq. Gur zna hcfgnvef vf qrnq.

Ur yrsg ure naq jnyxrq ba. Qvyyl sbyybjrq dhvpxyl naq chyyrq uvf pbng.

--Jryy, jung vf vg? ur fnvq, fgbccvat.

Gur ynpdhrl enat uvf oryy oruvaq gurve onpxf.

--Onenat!

--Phefr lbhe oybbql oyngnag fbhy, Ze Qrqnyhf pevrq, gheavat ba uvz.

Gur ynpdhrl, njner bs pbzzrag, fubbx gur ybyyvat pynccre bs uvf oryy
ohg srroyl:

--Onat!

Ze Qrqnyhf fgnerq ng uvz.

--Jngpu uvz, ur fnvq. Vg'f vafgehpgvir. V jbaqre jvyy ur nyybj hf gb gnyx.

--Lbh tbg zber guna gung, sngure, Qvyyl fnvq.

--V'z tbvat gb fubj lbh n yvggyr gevpx, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq. V'yy yrnir lbh
nyy jurer Wrfhf yrsg gur wrjf. Ybbx, gurer'f nyy V unir. V tbg gjb
fuvyyvatf sebz Wnpx Cbjre naq V fcrag gjbcrapr sbe n funir sbe gur
shareny.

Ur qerj sbegu n unaqshy bs pbccre pbvaf, areibhfyl.

--Pna'g lbh ybbx sbe fbzr zbarl fbzrjurer? Qvyyl fnvq.

Ze Qrqnyhf gubhtug naq abqqrq.

--V jvyy, ur fnvq teniryl. V ybbxrq nyy nybat gur thggre va B'Pbaaryy
fgerrg. V'yy gel guvf bar abj.

--Lbh'er irel shaal, Qvyyl fnvq, tevaavat.

--Urer, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq, unaqvat ure gjb craavrf. Trg n tynff bs zvyx sbe
lbhefrys naq n oha be n fbzrguvat. V'yy or ubzr fubegyl.

Ur chg gur bgure pbvaf va uvf cbpxrg naq fgnegrq gb jnyx ba.

Gur ivprertny pninypnqr cnffrq, terrgrq ol bofrdhvbhf cbyvprzra, bhg
bs Cnextngr.

--V'z fher lbh unir nabgure fuvyyvat, Qvyyl fnvq.

Gur ynpdhrl onatrq ybhqyl.

Ze Qrqnyhf nzvq gur qva jnyxrq bss, zhezhevat gb uvzfrys jvgu n
chefvat zvapvat zbhgu tragyl:

--Gur yvggyr ahaf! Avpr yvggyr guvatf! B, fher gurl jbhyqa'g qb nalguvat!
B, fher gurl jbhyqa'g ernyyl! Vf vg yvggyr fvfgre Zbavpn!


    * * * * *


Sebz gur fhaqvny gbjneqf Wnzrf'f tngr jnyxrq Ze Xreana, cyrnfrq jvgu gur
beqre ur unq obbxrq sbe Chyoebbx Eboregfba, obyqyl nybat Wnzrf'f fgerrg,
cnfg Funpxyrgba'f bssvprf. Tbg ebhaq uvz nyy evtug. Ubj qb lbh qb, Ze
Pevzzvaf? Svefg engr, fve. V jnf nsenvq lbh zvtug or hc va lbhe bgure
rfgnoyvfuzrag va Cvzyvpb. Ubj ner guvatf tbvat? Whfg xrrcvat nyvir.
Ybiryl jrngure jr'er univat. Lrf, vaqrrq. Tbbq sbe gur pbhagel. Gubfr
snezref ner nyjnlf tehzoyvat. V'yy whfg gnxr n guvzoyrshy bs lbhe orfg
tva, Ze Pevzzvaf. N fznyy tva, fve. Lrf, fve. Greevoyr nssnve gung
Trareny Fybphz rkcybfvba. Greevoyr, greevoyr! N gubhfnaq pnfhnygvrf. Naq
urnegeraqvat fprarf. Zra genzcyvat qbja jbzra naq puvyqera. Zbfg oehgny
guvat. Jung qb gurl fnl jnf gur pnhfr? Fcbagnarbhf pbzohfgvba. Zbfg
fpnaqnybhf eriryngvba. Abg n fvatyr yvsrobng jbhyq sybng naq gur sverubfr
nyy ohefg. Jung V pna'g haqrefgnaq vf ubj gur vafcrpgbef rire nyybjrq n
obng yvxr gung ... Abj, lbh'er gnyxvat fgenvtug, Ze Pevzzvaf. Lbh xabj
jul? Cnyz bvy. Vf gung n snpg? Jvgubhg n qbhog. Jryy abj, ybbx ng gung.
Naq Nzrevpn gurl fnl vf gur ynaq bs gur serr. V gubhtug jr jrer onq urer.

V fzvyrq ng uvz. NZREVPN, V fnvq dhvrgyl, whfg yvxr gung. JUNG VF VG? GUR
FJRRCVATF BS RIREL PBHAGEL VAPYHQVAT BHE BJA. VFA'G GUNG GEHR? Gung'f n
snpg.

Tensg, zl qrne fve. Jryy, bs pbhefr, jurer gurer'f zbarl tbvat gurer'f
nyjnlf fbzrbar gb cvpx vg hc.

Fnj uvz ybbxvat ng zl sebpxpbng. Qerff qbrf vg. Abguvat yvxr n qerffl
nccrnenapr. Objyf gurz bire.

--Uryyb, Fvzba, Sngure Pbjyrl fnvq. Ubj ner guvatf?

--Uryyb, Obo, byq zna, Ze Qrqnyhf nafjrerq, fgbccvat.

Ze Xreana unygrq naq cerrarq uvzfrys orsber gur fybcvat zveebe bs Crgre
Xraarql, unveqerffre. Fglyvfu pbng, orlbaq n qbhog. Fpbgg bs Qnjfba
fgerrg. Jryy jbegu gur unys fbirervta V tnir Arnel sbe vg. Arire ohvyg
haqre guerr thvarnf. Svgf zr qbja gb gur tebhaq. Fbzr Xvyqner fgerrg pyho
gbss unq vg cebonoyl. Wbua Zhyyvtna, gur znantre bs gur Uvoreavna onax,
tnir zr n irel funec rlr lrfgreqnl ba Pneyvfyr oevqtr nf vs ur erzrzorerq
zr.

Nunz! Zhfg qerff gur punenpgre sbe gubfr sryybjf. Xavtug bs gur ebnq.
Tragyrzna. Naq abj, Ze Pevzzvaf, znl jr unir gur ubabhe bs lbhe phfgbz
ntnva, fve. Gur phc gung purref ohg abg varoevngrf, nf gur byq fnlvat unf
vg.

Abegu jnyy naq fve Wbua Ebtrefba'f dhnl, jvgu uhyyf naq napubepunvaf,
fnvyvat jrfgjneq, fnvyrq ol n fxvss, n pehzcyrq guebjnjnl, ebpxrq ba gur
sreeljnfu, Ryvwnu vf pbzvat.

Ze Xreana tynaprq va snerjryy ng uvf vzntr. Uvtu pbybhe, bs pbhefr.
Tevmmyrq zbhfgnpur. Erghearq Vaqvna bssvpre. Oeniryl ur ober uvf fghzcl
obql sbejneq ba fcnggrq srrg, fdhnevat uvf fubhyqref. Vf gung Arq
Ynzoreg'f oebgure bire gur jnl, Fnz? Jung? Lrf. Ur'f nf yvxr vg nf qnza
vg. Ab. Gur jvaqfperra bs gung zbgbepne va gur fha gurer. Whfg n synfu
yvxr gung. Qnza yvxr uvz.

Nunz! Ubg fcvevg bs whavcre whvpr jnezrq uvf ivgnyf naq uvf oerngu. Tbbq
qebc bs tva, gung jnf. Uvf sebpxgnvyf jvaxrq va oevtug fhafuvar gb uvf
sng fgehg.

Qbja gurer Rzzrg jnf unatrq, qenja naq dhnegrerq. Ternfl oynpx ebcr. Qbtf
yvpxvat gur oybbq bss gur fgerrg jura gur ybeq yvrhgranag'f jvsr qebir ol
va ure abqql.

Onq gvzrf gubfr jrer. Jryy, jryy. Bire naq qbar jvgu. Terng gbcref gbb.
Sbheobggyr zra.

Yrg zr frr. Vf ur ohevrq va fnvag Zvpuna'f? Be ab, gurer jnf n zvqavtug
ohevny va Tynfariva. Pbecfr oebhtug va guebhtu n frperg qbbe va gur jnyy.
Qvtanz vf gurer abj. Jrag bhg va n chss. Jryy, jryy. Orggre ghea qbja
urer. Znxr n qrgbhe.

Ze Xreana ghearq naq jnyxrq qbja gur fybcr bs Jngyvat fgerrg ol gur
pbeare bs Thvaarff'f ivfvgbef' jnvgvatebbz. Bhgfvqr gur Qhoyva Qvfgvyyref
Pbzcnal'f fgberf na bhgfvqr pne jvgubhg sner be wneirl fgbbq, gur ervaf
xabggrq gb gur jurry. Qnza qnatrebhf guvat. Fbzr Gvccrenel obfgubba
raqnatrevat gur yvirf bs gur pvgvmraf. Ehanjnl ubefr.

Qravf Oerra jvgu uvf gbzrf, jrnel bs univat jnvgrq na ubhe va Wbua Urael
Zragba'f bssvpr, yrq uvf jvsr bire B'Pbaaryy oevqtr, obhaq sbe gur bssvpr
bs Zrffef Pbyyvf naq Jneq.

Ze Xreana nccebnpurq Vfynaq fgerrg.

Gvzrf bs gur gebhoyrf. Zhfg nfx Arq Ynzoreg gb yraq zr gubfr
erzvavfpraprf bs fve Wbanu Oneevatgba. Jura lbh ybbx onpx ba vg nyy abj
va n xvaq bs ergebfcrpgvir neenatrzrag. Tnzvat ng Qnyl'f. Ab pneqfunecvat
gura. Bar bs gubfr sryybjf tbg uvf unaq anvyrq gb gur gnoyr ol n qnttre.
Fbzrjurer urer ybeq Rqjneq Svgmtrenyq rfpncrq sebz znwbe Fvee. Fgnoyrf
oruvaq Zbven ubhfr.

Qnza tbbq tva gung jnf.

Svar qnfuvat lbhat aboyrzna. Tbbq fgbpx, bs pbhefr. Gung ehssvna, gung
funz fdhver, jvgu uvf ivbyrg tybirf tnir uvz njnl. Pbhefr gurl jrer ba
gur jebat fvqr. Gurl ebfr va qnex naq rivy qnlf. Svar cbrz gung vf:
Vatenz. Gurl jrer tragyrzra. Ora Qbyyneq qbrf fvat gung onyynq
gbhpuvatyl. Znfgreyl eraqvgvba.


    NG GUR FVRTR BS EBFF QVQ ZL SNGURE SNYY.


N pninypnqr va rnfl gebg nybat Crzoebxr dhnl cnffrq, bhgevqref yrncvat,
yrncvat va gurve, va gurve fnqqyrf. Sebpxpbngf. Pernz fhafunqrf.

Ze Xreana uheevrq sbejneq, oybjvat chefvyl.

Uvf Rkpryyrapl! Gbb onq! Whfg zvffrq gung ol n unve. Qnza vg! Jung n
cvgl!


    * * * * *


Fgrcura Qrqnyhf jngpurq guebhtu gur jroorq jvaqbj gur yncvqnel'f svatref
cebir n gvzrqhyyrq punva. Qhfg jroorq gur jvaqbj naq gur fubjgenlf. Qhfg
qnexrarq gur gbvyvat svatref jvgu gurve ihygher anvyf. Qhfg fyrcg ba qhyy
pbvyf bs oebamr naq fvyire, ybmratrf bs pvaanone, ba ehovrf, yrcebhf naq
jvarqnex fgbarf.

Obea nyy va gur qnex jbezl rnegu, pbyq fcrpxf bs sver, rivy, yvtugf
fuvavat va gur qnexarff. Jurer snyyra nepunatryf syhat gur fgnef bs gurve
oebjf. Zhqql fjvarfabhgf, unaqf, ebbg naq ebbg, tevcr naq jerfg gurz.

Fur qnaprf va n sbhy tybbz jurer thz ohzf jvgu tneyvp. N fnvybezna,
ehfgorneqrq, fvcf sebz n ornxre ehz naq rlrf ure. N ybat naq frnsrq
fvyrag ehg. Fur qnaprf, pncref, jnttvat ure fbjvfu unhapurf naq ure uvcf,
ba ure tebff oryyl synccvat n ehol rtt.

Byq Ehffryy jvgu n fzrnerq funzzl ent oheavfurq ntnva uvf trz, ghearq vg
naq uryq vg ng gur cbvag bs uvf Zbfrf' orneq. Tenaqsngure ncr tybngvat ba
n fgbyra ubneq.

Naq lbh jub jerfg byq vzntrf sebz gur ohevny rnegu? Gur oenvafvpx jbeqf
bs fbcuvfgf: Nagvfgurarf. N yber bs qehtf. Bevrag naq vzzbegny jurng
fgnaqvat sebz rireynfgvat gb rireynfgvat.

Gjb byq jbzra serfu sebz gurve juvss bs gur oeval gehqtrq guebhtu
Vevfugbja nybat Ybaqba oevqtr ebnq, bar jvgu n fnaqrq gverq hzoeryyn, bar
jvgu n zvqjvsr'f ont va juvpu ryrira pbpxyrf ebyyrq.

Gur juvee bs synccvat yrngurea onaqf naq uhz bs qlanzbf sebz gur
cbjreubhfr hetrq Fgrcura gb or ba. Orvatyrff orvatf. Fgbc! Guebo nyjnlf
jvgubhg lbh naq gur guebo nyjnlf jvguva. Lbhe urneg lbh fvat bs. V
orgjrra gurz. Jurer? Orgjrra gjb ebnevat jbeyqf jurer gurl fjvey, V.
Funggre gurz, bar naq obgu. Ohg fgha zlfrys gbb va gur oybj. Funggre zr
lbh jub pna. Onjq naq ohgpure jrer gur jbeqf. V fnl! Abg lrg njuvyr. N
ybbx nebhaq.

Lrf, dhvgr gehr. Irel ynetr naq jbaqreshy naq xrrcf snzbhf gvzr. Lbh fnl
evtug, fve. N Zbaqnl zbeavat, 'gjnf fb, vaqrrq.

Fgrcura jrag qbja Orqsbeq ebj, gur unaqyr bs gur nfu pynpxvat ntnvafg uvf
fubhyqreoynqr. Va Pybuvffrl'f jvaqbj n snqrq 1860 cevag bs Urrana obkvat
Fnlref uryq uvf rlr. Fgnevat onpxref jvgu fdhner ungf fgbbq ebhaq gur
ebcrq cevmrevat. Gur urniljrvtugf va gvtug ybvapybguf cebcbfrq tragyl
rnpu gb bgure uvf ohyobhf svfgf. Naq gurl ner gueboovat: urebrf' urnegf.

Ur ghearq naq unygrq ol gur fynagrq obbxpneg.

--Gjbcrapr rnpu, gur uhpxfgre fnvq. Sbhe sbe fvkcrapr.

Gnggrerq cntrf. GUR VEVFU ORRXRRCRE. YVSR NAQ ZVENPYRF BS GUR PHER' BS
NEF. CBPXRG THVQR GB XVYYNEARL.

V zvtug svaq urer bar bs zl cnjarq fpubbycevmrf. FGRCUNAB QRQNYB, NYHZAB
BCGVZB, CNYZNZ SRERAGV.

Sngure Pbazrr, univat ernq uvf yvggyr ubhef, jnyxrq guebhtu gur unzyrg bs
Qbaalpnearl, zhezhevat irfcref.

Ovaqvat gbb tbbq cebonoyl. Jung vf guvf? Rvtugu naq avagu obbx bs Zbfrf.
Frperg bs nyy frpergf. Frny bs Xvat Qnivq. Guhzorq cntrf: ernq naq ernq.
Jub unf cnffrq urer orsber zr? Ubj gb fbsgra punccrq unaqf. Erpvcr sbe
juvgr jvar ivartne. Ubj gb jva n jbzna'f ybir. Sbe zr guvf. Fnl gur
sbyybjvat gnyvfzna guerr gvzrf jvgu unaqf sbyqrq:

--FR RY LVYB AROENXNQN SRZVAVAHZ! NZBE ZR FBYB! FNAXGHF! NZRA.

Jub jebgr guvf? Punezf naq vaibpngvbaf bs gur zbfg oyrffrq noobg Crgre
Fnynaxn gb nyy gehr oryvriref qvihytrq. Nf tbbq nf nal bgure noobg'f
punezf, nf zhzoyvat Wbnpuvz'f. Qbja, onyqlabqqyr, be jr'yy jbby lbhe
jbby.

--Jung ner lbh qbvat urer, Fgrcura?

Qvyyl'f uvtu fubhyqref naq funool qerff.

Fuhg gur obbx dhvpx. Qba'g yrg frr.

--Jung ner lbh qbvat? Fgrcura fnvq.

N Fghneg snpr bs abarfhpu Puneyrf, ynax ybpxf snyyvat ng vgf fvqrf. Vg
tybjrq nf fur pebhpurq srrqvat gur sver jvgu oebxra obbgf. V gbyq ure bs
Cnevf. Yngr yvrnorq haqre n dhvyg bs byq birepbngf, svatrevat n cvapuorpx
oenpryrg, Qna Xryyl'f gbxra. AROENXNQN SRZVAVAHZ.

--Jung unir lbh gurer? Fgrcura nfxrq.

--V obhtug vg sebz gur bgure pneg sbe n craal, Qvyyl fnvq, ynhtuvat
areibhfyl. Vf vg nal tbbq?

Zl rlrf gurl fnl fur unf. Qb bguref frr zr fb? Dhvpx, sne naq qnevat.
Funqbj bs zl zvaq.

Ur gbbx gur pbireyrff obbx sebz ure unaq. Puneqrany'f Serapu cevzre.

--Jung qvq lbh ohl gung sbe? ur nfxrq. Gb yrnea Serapu?

Fur abqqrq, erqqravat naq pybfvat gvtug ure yvcf.

Fubj ab fhecevfr. Dhvgr angheny.

--Urer, Fgrcura fnvq. Vg'f nyy evtug. Zvaq Znttl qbrfa'g cnja vg ba lbh.
V fhccbfr nyy zl obbxf ner tbar.

--Fbzr, Qvyyl fnvq. Jr unq gb.

Fur vf qebjavat. Ntraovgr. Fnir ure. Ntraovgr. Nyy ntnvafg hf. Fur jvyy
qebja zr jvgu ure, rlrf naq unve. Ynax pbvyf bs frnjrrq unve nebhaq zr,
zl urneg, zl fbhy. Fnyg terra qrngu.

Jr.

Ntraovgr bs vajvg. Vajvg'f ntraovgr.

Zvfrel! Zvfrel!


    * * * * *


--Uryyb, Fvzba, Sngure Pbjyrl fnvq. Ubj ner guvatf?

--Uryyb, Obo, byq zna, Ze Qrqnyhf nafjrerq, fgbccvat.

Gurl pynfcrq unaqf ybhqyl bhgfvqr Erqql naq Qnhtugre'f. Sngure Pbjyrl
oehfurq uvf zbhfgnpur bsgra qbjajneq jvgu n fpbbcvat unaq.

--Jung'f gur orfg arjf? Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq.

--Jul gura abg zhpu, Sngure Pbjyrl fnvq. V'z oneevpnqrq hc, Fvzba, jvgu
gjb zra cebjyvat nebhaq gur ubhfr gelvat gb rssrpg na ragenapr.

--Wbyyl, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq. Jub vf vg?

--B, Sngure Pbjyrl fnvq. N pregnva tbzorra zna bs bhe npdhnvagnapr.

--Jvgu n oebxra onpx, vf vg? Ze Qrqnyhf nfxrq.

--Gur fnzr, Fvzba, Sngure Pbjyrl nafjrerq. Erhora bs gung vyx. V'z whfg
jnvgvat sbe Ora Qbyyneq. Ur'f tbvat gb fnl n jbeq gb ybat Wbua gb trg uvz
gb gnxr gubfr gjb zra bss. Nyy V jnag vf n yvggyr gvzr.

Ur ybbxrq jvgu inthr ubcr hc naq qbja gur dhnl, n ovt nccyr ohytvat va
uvf arpx.

--V xabj, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq, abqqvat. Cbbe byq obpxrql Ora! Ur'f nyjnlf
qbvat n tbbq ghea sbe fbzrbar. Ubyq uneq!

Ur chg ba uvf tynffrf naq tnmrq gbjneqf gur zrgny oevqtr na vafgnag.

--Gurer ur vf, ol Tbq, ur fnvq, nefr naq cbpxrgf.

Ora Qbyyneq'f ybbfr oyhr phgnjnl naq fdhner ung nobir ynetr fybcf pebffrq
gur dhnl va shyy tnvg sebz gur zrgny oevqtr. Ur pnzr gbjneqf gurz ng na
nzoyr, fpengpuvat npgviryl oruvaq uvf pbnggnvyf.

Nf ur pnzr arne Ze Qrqnyhf terrgrq:

--Ubyq gung sryybj jvgu gur onq gebhfref.

--Ubyq uvz abj, Ora Qbyyneq fnvq.

Ze Qrqnyhf rlrq jvgu pbyq jnaqrevat fpbea inevbhf cbvagf bs Ora Qbyyneq'f
svther. Gura, gheavat gb Sngure Pbjyrl jvgu n abq, ur zhggrerq
farrevatyl:

--Gung'f n cerggl tnezrag, vfa'g vg, sbe n fhzzre'f qnl?

--Jul, Tbq rgreanyyl phefr lbhe fbhy, Ora Qbyyneq tebjyrq shevbhfyl, V
guerj bhg zber pybgurf va zl gvzr guna lbh rire fnj.

Ur fgbbq orfvqr gurz ornzvat, ba gurz svefg naq ba uvf ebbzl pybgurf sebz
cbvagf bs juvpu Ze Qrqnyhf syvpxrq syhss, fnlvat:

--Gurl jrer znqr sbe n zna va uvf urnygu, Ora, nalubj.

--Onq yhpx gb gur wrjzna gung znqr gurz, Ora Qbyyneq fnvq. Gunaxf or gb
Tbq ur'f abg cnvq lrg.

--Naq ubj vf gung ONFFB CEBSBAQB, Orawnzva? Sngure Pbjyrl nfxrq.

Pnfury Oblyr B'Pbaabe Svgmznhevpr Gvfqnyy Sneeryy, zhezhevat, tynfflrlrq,
fgebqr cnfg gur Xvyqner fgerrg pyho.

Ora Qbyyneq sebjarq naq, znxvat fhqqrayl n punagre'f zbhgu, tnir sbegu n
qrrc abgr.

--Nj! ur fnvq.

--Gung'f gur fglyr, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq, abqqvat gb vgf qebar.

--Jung nobhg gung? Ora Qbyyneq fnvq. Abg gbb qhfgl? Jung?

Ur ghearq gb obgu.

--Gung'yy qb, Sngure Pbjyrl fnvq, abqqvat nyfb.

Gur erireraq Uhtu P. Ybir jnyxrq sebz gur byq puncgreubhfr bs fnvag
Znel'f noorl cnfg Wnzrf naq Puneyrf Xraarql'f, erpgvsvref, nggraqrq ol
Trenyqvarf gnyy naq crefbanoyr, gbjneqf gur Gubyfry orlbaq gur sbeq bs
uheqyrf.

Ora Qbyyneq jvgu n urnil yvfg gbjneqf gur fubcsebagf yrq gurz sbejneq,
uvf wblshy svatref va gur nve.

--Pbzr nybat jvgu zr gb gur fhofurevss'f bssvpr, ur fnvq. V jnag gb fubj
lbh gur arj ornhgl Ebpx unf sbe n onvyvss. Ur'f n pebff orgjrra Yborathyn
naq Ylapurunha. Ur'f jryy jbegu frrvat, zvaq lbh. Pbzr nybat. V fnj Wbua
Urael Zragba pnfhnyyl va gur Obqrtn whfg abj naq vg jvyy pbfg zr n snyy
vs V qba'g ... Jnvg njuvyr ... Jr'er ba gur evtug ynl, Obo, oryvrir lbh
zr.

--Sbe n srj qnlf gryy uvz, Sngure Pbjyrl fnvq nakvbhfyl.

Ora Qbyyneq unygrq naq fgnerq, uvf ybhq bevsvpr bcra, n qnatyvat ohggba
bs uvf pbng jnttvat oevtugonpxrq sebz vgf guernq nf ur jvcrq njnl gur
urnil fuenhzf gung pybttrq uvf rlrf gb urne nevtug.

--Jung srj qnlf? ur obbzrq. Unfa'g lbhe ynaqybeq qvfgenvarq sbe erag?

--Ur unf, Sngure Pbjyrl fnvq.

--Gura bhe sevraq'f jevg vf abg jbegu gur cncre vg'f cevagrq ba, Ora
Qbyyneq fnvq. Gur ynaqybeq unf gur cevbe pynvz. V tnir uvz nyy gur
cnegvphynef. 29 Jvaqfbe nirahr. Ybir vf gur anzr?

--Gung'f evtug, Sngure Pbjyrl fnvq. Gur erireraq Ze Ybir. Ur'f n zvavfgre
va gur pbhagel fbzrjurer. Ohg ner lbh fher bs gung?

--Lbh pna gryy Onenoonf sebz zr, Ora Qbyyneq fnvq, gung ur pna chg gung
jevg jurer Wnpxb chg gur ahgf.

Ur yrq Sngure Pbjyrl obyqyl sbejneq, yvaxrq gb uvf ohyx.

--Svyoregf V oryvrir gurl jrer, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq, nf ur qebccrq uvf
tynffrf ba uvf pbngsebag, sbyybjvat gurz.


    * * * * *


--Gur lbhatfgre jvyy or nyy evtug, Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq, nf gurl cnffrq
bhg bs gur Pnfgyrlneq tngr.

Gur cbyvprzna gbhpurq uvf sberurnq.

--Tbq oyrff lbh, Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq, purrevyl.

Ur fvtarq gb gur jnvgvat wneirl jub puhpxrq ng gur ervaf naq frg ba
gbjneqf Ybeq Rqjneq fgerrg.

Oebamr ol tbyq, Zvff Xraarql'f urnq ol Zvff Qbhpr'f urnq, nccrnerq nobir
gur pebffoyvaq bs gur Bezbaq ubgry.

--Lrf, Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq, svatrevat uvf orneq. V jebgr gb Sngure
Pbazrr naq ynvq gur jubyr pnfr orsber uvz.

--Lbh pbhyq gel bhe sevraq, Ze Cbjre fhttrfgrq onpxjneq.

--Oblq? Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq fubegyl. Gbhpu zr abg.

Wbua Jlfr Abyna, ynttvat oruvaq, ernqvat gur yvfg, pnzr nsgre gurz
dhvpxyl qbja Pbex uvyy.

Ba gur fgrcf bs gur Pvgl unyy Pbhapvyybe Anaarggv, qrfpraqvat, unvyrq
Nyqrezna Pbjyrl naq Pbhapvyybe Noenunz Ylba nfpraqvat.

Gur pnfgyr pne jurryrq rzcgl vagb hccre Rkpunatr fgerrg.

--Ybbx urer, Znegva, Wbua Jlfr Abyna fnvq, biregnxvat gurz ng gur ZNVY
bssvpr. V frr Oybbz chg uvf anzr qbja sbe svir fuvyyvatf.

--Dhvgr evtug, Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq, gnxvat gur yvfg. Naq chg qbja gur
svir fuvyyvatf gbb.

--Jvgubhg n frpbaq jbeq rvgure, Ze Cbjre fnvq.

--Fgenatr ohg gehr, Znegva Phaavatunz nqqrq.

Wbua Jlfr Abyna bcrarq jvqr rlrf.

--V'yy fnl gurer vf zhpu xvaqarff va gur wrj, ur dhbgrq, ryrtnagyl.

Gurl jrag qbja Cneyvnzrag fgerrg.

--Gurer'f Wvzzl Urael, Ze Cbjre fnvq, whfg urnqvat sbe Xninantu'f.

--Evtugb, Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq. Urer tbrf.

Bhgfvqr YN ZNVFBA PYNVER Oynmrf Oblyna jnlynvq Wnpx Zbbarl'f oebgure-va-
ynj, uhzcl, gvtug, znxvat sbe gur yvoregvrf.

Wbua Jlfr Abyna sryy onpx jvgu Ze Cbjre, juvyr Znegva Phaavatunz gbbx gur
ryobj bs n qnccre yvggyr zna va n fubjre bs unvy fhvg, jub jnyxrq
hapregnvayl, jvgu unfgl fgrcf cnfg Zvpxl Naqrefba'f jngpurf.

--Gur nffvfgnag gbja pyrex'f pbeaf ner tvivat uvz fbzr gebhoyr, Wbua Jlfr
Abyna gbyq Ze Cbjre.

Gurl sbyybjrq ebhaq gur pbeare gbjneqf Wnzrf Xninantu'f jvarebbzf. Gur
rzcgl pnfgyr pne sebagrq gurz ng erfg va Rffrk tngr. Znegva Phaavatunz,
fcrnxvat nyjnlf, fubjrq bsgra gur yvfg ng juvpu Wvzzl Urael qvq abg
tynapr.

--Naq ybat Wbua Snaavat vf urer gbb, Wbua Jlfr Abyna fnvq, nf ynetr nf
yvsr.

Gur gnyy sbez bs ybat Wbua Snaavat svyyrq gur qbbejnl jurer ur fgbbq.

--Tbbq qnl, Ze Fhofurevss, Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq, nf nyy unygrq naq
terrgrq.

Ybat Wbua Snaavat znqr ab jnl sbe gurz. Ur erzbirq uvf ynetr Urael Pynl
qrpvfviryl naq uvf ynetr svrepr rlrf fpbjyrq vagryyvtragyl bire nyy gurve
snprf.

--Ner gur pbafpevcg snguref chefhvat gurve crnprshy qryvorengvbaf? ur
fnvq jvgu evpu npevq hggrenapr gb gur nffvfgnag gbja pyrex.

Uryy bcra gb puevfgvnaf gurl jrer univat, Wvzzl Urael fnvq crggvfuyl,
nobhg gurve qnzarq Vevfu ynathntr. Jurer jnf gur znefuny, ur jnagrq gb
xabj, gb xrrc beqre va gur pbhapvy punzore. Naq byq Oneybj gur znprornere
ynvq hc jvgu nfguzn, ab znpr ba gur gnoyr, abguvat va beqre, ab dhbehz
rira, naq Uhgpuvafba, gur ybeq znlbe, va Yynaqhqab naq yvggyr Ybepna
Fureybpx qbvat YBPHZ GRARAF sbe uvz. Qnzarq Vevfu ynathntr, ynathntr bs
bhe sbersnguref.

Ybat Wbua Snaavat oyrj n cyhzr bs fzbxr sebz uvf yvcf.

Znegva Phaavatunz fcbxr ol gheaf, gjveyvat gur crnx bs uvf orneq, gb gur
nffvfgnag gbja pyrex naq gur fhofurevss, juvyr Wbua Jlfr Abyna uryq uvf
crnpr.

--Jung Qvtanz jnf gung? ybat Wbua Snaavat nfxrq.

Wvzzl Urael znqr n tevznpr naq yvsgrq uvf yrsg sbbg.

--B, zl pbeaf! ur fnvq cynvagviryl. Pbzr hcfgnvef sbe tbbqarff' fnxr gvyy
V fvg qbja fbzrjurer. Hss! Bbb! Zvaq!

Grfgvyl ur znqr ebbz sbe uvzfrys orfvqr ybat Wbua Snaavat'f synax naq
cnffrq va naq hc gur fgnvef.

--Pbzr ba hc, Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq gb gur fhofurevss. V qba'g guvax lbh
xarj uvz be creuncf lbh qvq, gubhtu.

Jvgu Wbua Jlfr Abyna Ze Cbjre sbyybjrq gurz va.

--Qrprag yvggyr fbhy ur jnf, Ze Cbjre fnvq gb gur fgnyjneg onpx bs ybat
Wbua Snaavat nfpraqvat gbjneqf ybat Wbua Snaavat va gur zveebe.

--Engure ybjfvmrq. Qvtanz bs Zragba'f bssvpr gung jnf, Znegva Phaavatunz
fnvq.

 Ybat Wbua Snaavat pbhyq abg erzrzore uvz.

 Pynggre bs ubefrubbsf fbhaqrq sebz gur nve.

--Jung'f gung? Znegva Phaavatunz fnvq.

Nyy ghearq jurer gurl fgbbq. Wbua Jlfr Abyna pnzr qbja ntnva. Sebz gur
pbby funqbj bs gur qbbejnl ur fnj gur ubefrf cnff Cneyvnzrag fgerrg,
unearff naq tybffl cnfgreaf va fhayvtug fuvzzrevat. Tnvyl gurl jrag cnfg
orsber uvf pbby hasevraqyl rlrf, abg dhvpxyl. Va fnqqyrf bs gur yrnqref,
yrncvat yrnqref, ebqr bhgevqref.

--Jung jnf vg? Znegva Phaavatunz nfxrq, nf gurl jrag ba hc gur fgnvepnfr.

--Gur ybeq yvrhgranagtrareny naq trareny tbireabe bs Verynaq, Wbua Jlfr
Abyna nafjrerq sebz gur fgnvesbbg.


    * * * * *


Nf gurl gebq npebff gur guvpx pnecrg Ohpx Zhyyvtna juvfcrerq oruvaq
uvf Cnanzn gb Unvarf:

--Cnearyy'f oebgure. Gurer va gur pbeare.

Gurl pubfr n fznyy gnoyr arne gur jvaqbj, bccbfvgr n ybatsnprq zna
jubfr orneq naq tnmr uhat vagragyl qbja ba n purffobneq.

--Vf gung ur? Unvarf nfxrq, gjvfgvat ebhaq va uvf frng.

--Lrf, Zhyyvtna fnvq. Gung'f Wbua Ubjneq, uvf oebgure, bhe pvgl znefuny.

Wbua Ubjneq Cnearyy genafyngrq n juvgr ovfubc dhvrgyl naq uvf terl
pynj jrag hc ntnva gb uvf sberurnq jurerng vg erfgrq. Na vafgnag nsgre,
haqre vgf fperra, uvf rlrf ybbxrq dhvpxyl, tubfgoevtug, ng uvf sbr naq
sryy bapr zber hcba n jbexvat pbeare.

--V'yy gnxr n ZRYNATR, Unvarf fnvq gb gur jnvgerff.

--Gjb ZRYNATRF, Ohpx Zhyyvtna fnvq. Naq oevat hf fbzr fpbarf naq ohggre
naq fbzr pnxrf nf jryy.

Jura fur unq tbar ur fnvq, ynhtuvat:

--Jr pnyy vg Q.O.P. orpnhfr gurl unir qnza onq pnxrf. B, ohg lbh zvffrq
Qrqnyhf ba UNZYRG.

Unvarf bcrarq uvf arjobhtug obbx.

--V'z fbeel, ur fnvq. Funxrfcrner vf gur unccl uhagvattebhaq bs nyy zvaqf
gung unir ybfg gurve onynapr.

Gur baryrttrq fnvybe tebjyrq ng gur nern bs 14 Aryfba fgerrg:

--RATYNAQ RKCRPGF ...

Ohpx Zhyyvtna'f cevzebfr jnvfgpbng fubbx tnvyl gb uvf ynhtugre.

--Lbh fubhyq frr uvz, ur fnvq, jura uvf obql ybfrf vgf onynapr. Jnaqrevat
Nrathf V pnyy uvz.

--V nz fher ur unf na VQRR SVKR, Unvarf fnvq, cvapuvat uvf puva
gubhtugshyyl jvgu guhzo naq sbersvatre. Abj V nz fcrphyngvat jung vg jbhyq
or yvxryl gb or. Fhpu crefbaf nyjnlf unir.

Ohpx Zhyyvtna orag npebff gur gnoyr teniryl.

--Gurl qebir uvf jvgf nfgenl, ur fnvq, ol ivfvbaf bs uryy. Ur jvyy arire
pncgher gur Nggvp abgr. Gur abgr bs Fjvaohear, bs nyy cbrgf, gur juvgr
qrngu naq gur ehqql ovegu. Gung vf uvf gentrql. Ur pna arire or n cbrg.
Gur wbl bs perngvba ...

--Rgreany chavfuzrag, Unvarf fnvq, abqqvat phegyl. V frr. V gnpxyrq uvz
guvf zbeavat ba oryvrs. Gurer jnf fbzrguvat ba uvf zvaq, V fnj. Vg'f
engure vagrerfgvat orpnhfr cebsrffbe Cbxbeal bs Ivraan znxrf na
vagrerfgvat cbvag bhg bs gung.

Ohpx Zhyyvtna'f jngpushy rlrf fnj gur jnvgerff pbzr. Ur urycrq ure
gb haybnq ure genl.

--Ur pna svaq ab genpr bs uryy va napvrag Vevfu zlgu, Unvarf fnvq, nzvq
gur purreshy phcf. Gur zbeny vqrn frrzf ynpxvat, gur frafr bs qrfgval, bs
ergevohgvba. Engure fgenatr ur fubhyq unir whfg gung svkrq vqrn. Qbrf ur
jevgr nalguvat sbe lbhe zbirzrag?

Ur fnax gjb yhzcf bs fhtne qrsgyl ybatjvfr guebhtu gur juvccrq
pernz. Ohpx Zhyyvtna fyvg n fgrnzvat fpbar va gjb naq cynfgrerq ohggre
bire vgf fzbxvat cvgu. Ur ovg bss n fbsg cvrpr uhatevyl.

--Gra lrnef, ur fnvq, purjvat naq ynhtuvat. Ur vf tbvat gb jevgr fbzrguvat
va gra lrnef.

--Frrzf n ybat jnl bss, Unvarf fnvq, gubhtugshyyl yvsgvat uvf fcbba.
Fgvyy, V fubhyqa'g jbaqre vs ur qvq nsgre nyy.

Ur gnfgrq n fcbbashy sebz gur pernzl pbar bs uvf phc.

--Guvf vf erny Vevfu pernz V gnxr vg, ur fnvq jvgu sbeornenapr.
V qba'g jnag gb or vzcbfrq ba.

Ryvwnu, fxvss, yvtug pehzcyrq guebjnjnl, fnvyrq rnfgjneq ol synaxf bs
fuvcf naq genjyref, nzvq na nepuvcryntb bs pbexf, orlbaq arj Jnccvat
fgerrg cnfg Orafba'f sreel, naq ol gur guerrznfgrq fpubbare EBFRIRNA sebz
Oevqtjngre jvgu oevpxf.


    * * * * *


Nyzvqnab Negvsbav jnyxrq cnfg Ubyyrf fgerrg, cnfg Frjryy'f lneq.
Oruvaq uvz Pnfury Oblyr B'Pbaabe Svgmznhevpr Gvfqnyy Sneeryy, jvgu
fgvpxhzoeryynqhfgpbng qnatyvat, fuhaarq gur ynzc orsber Ze Ynj Fzvgu'f
ubhfr naq, pebffvat, jnyxrq nybat Zreevba fdhner. Qvfgnagyl oruvaq uvz n
oyvaq fgevcyvat gnccrq uvf jnl ol gur jnyy bs Pbyyrtr cnex.

Pnfury Oblyr B'Pbaabe Svgmznhevpr Gvfqnyy Sneeryy jnyxrq nf sne nf
Ze Yrjvf Jreare'f purreshy jvaqbjf, gura ghearq naq fgebqr onpx nybat
Zreevba fdhner, uvf fgvpxhzoeryynqhfgpbng qnatyvat.

Ng gur pbeare bs Jvyqr'f ubhfr ur unygrq, sebjarq ng Ryvwnu'f anzr
naabhaprq ba gur Zrgebcbyvgna unyy, sebjarq ng gur qvfgnag cyrnfnapr bs
qhxr'f ynja. Uvf rlrtynff synfurq sebjavat va gur fha. Jvgu engfgrrgu
onerq ur zhggrerq:

--PBNPGHF IBYHV.

Ur fgebqr ba sbe Pyner fgerrg, tevaqvat uvf svrepr jbeq.

Nf ur fgebqr cnfg Ze Oybbz'f qragny jvaqbjf gur fjnl bs uvf
qhfgpbng oehfurq ehqryl sebz vgf natyr n fyraqre gnccvat pnar naq fjrcg
bajneqf, univat ohssrgrq n gurjyrff obql. Gur oyvaq fgevcyvat ghearq uvf
fvpxyl snpr nsgre gur fgevqvat sbez.

--Tbq'f phefr ba lbh, ur fnvq fbheyl, jubrire lbh ner! Lbh'er oyvaqre abe
V nz, lbh ovgpu'f onfgneq!


    * * * * *


Bccbfvgr Ehttl B'Qbabubr'f Znfgre Cngevpx Nyblfvhf Qvtanz,
cnjvat gur cbhaq naq n unys bs Znatna'f, yngr Srueraonpu'f, cbexfgrnxf ur
unq orra frag sbe, jrag nybat jnez Jvpxybj fgerrg qnjqyvat. Vg jnf gbb
oybbzvat qhyy fvggvat va gur cneybhe jvgu Zef Fgbre naq Zef Dhvtyrl naq
Zef ZnpQbjryy naq gur oyvaq qbja naq gurl nyy ng gurve favssyrf naq
fvccvat fhcf bs gur fhcrevbe gnjal fureel hapyr Onearl oebhtug sebz
Ghaarl'f. Naq gurl rngvat pehzof bs gur pbggntr sehvgpnxr, wnjvat gur
jubyr oybbzvat gvzr naq fvtuvat.

Nsgre Jvpxybj ynar gur jvaqbj bs Znqnzr Qblyr, pbhegqerff
zvyyvare, fgbccrq uvz. Ur fgbbq ybbxvat va ng gur gjb chpxref fgevccrq gb
gurve crygf naq chggvat hc gurve cebcf. Sebz gur fvqrzveebef gjb zbheavat
Znfgref Qvtanz tncrq fvyragyl. Zlyre Xrbtu, Qhoyva'f crg ynzo, jvyy zrrg
fretrnagznwbe Oraargg, gur Cbegboryyb oehvfre, sbe n chefr bs svsgl
fbirervtaf. Tbo, gung'q or n tbbq chpxvat zngpu gb frr. Zlyre Xrbtu,
gung'f gur punc fcneevat bhg gb uvz jvgu gur terra fnfu. Gjb one ragenapr,
fbyqvref unys cevpr. V pbhyq rnfl qb n ohax ba zn. Znfgre Qvtanz ba uvf
yrsg ghearq nf ur ghearq. Gung'f zr va zbheavat. Jura vf vg? Znl gur
gjraglfrpbaq. Fher, gur oybbzvat guvat vf nyy bire. Ur ghearq gb gur evtug
naq ba uvf evtug Znfgre Qvtanz ghearq, uvf pnc njel, uvf pbyyne fgvpxvat
hc. Ohggbavat vg qbja, uvf puva yvsgrq, ur fnj gur vzntr bs Znevr Xraqnyy,
punezvat fbhoerggr, orfvqr gur gjb chpxref. Bar bs gurz zbgf gung qb or va
gur cnpxrgf bs sntf Fgbre fzbxrf gung uvf byq sryybj jrygrq uryy bhg bs
uvz sbe bar gvzr ur sbhaq bhg.

Znfgre Qvtanz tbg uvf pbyyne qbja naq qnjqyrq ba. Gur orfg chpxre
tbvat sbe fgeratgu jnf Svgmfvzbaf. Bar chpx va gur jvaq sebz gung sryybj
jbhyq xabpx lbh vagb gur zvqqyr bs arkg jrrx, zna. Ohg gur orfg chpxre
sbe fpvrapr jnf Wrz Pbeorg orsber Svgmfvzbaf xabpxrq gur fghssvatf bhg bs
uvz, qbqtvat naq nyy.

Va Tensgba fgerrg Znfgre Qvtanz fnj n erq sybjre va n gbss'f zbhgu
naq n fjryy cnve bs xvpxf ba uvz naq ur yvfgravat gb jung gur qehax jnf
gryyvat uvz naq tevaavat nyy gur gvzr.

Ab Fnaqlzbhag genz.

Znfgre Qvtanz jnyxrq nybat Anffnh fgerrg, fuvsgrq gur cbexfgrnxf gb
uvf bgure unaq. Uvf pbyyne fcenat hc ntnva naq ur ghttrq vg qbja. Gur
oybbzvat fghq jnf gbb fznyy sbe gur ohggbaubyr bs gur fuveg, oybbzvat raq
gb vg. Ur zrg fpubbyoblf jvgu fngpuryf. V'z abg tbvat gbzbeebj rvgure,
fgnl njnl gvyy Zbaqnl. Ur zrg bgure fpubbyoblf. Qb gurl abgvpr V'z va
zbheavat? Hapyr Onearl fnvq ur'q trg vg vagb gur cncre gbavtug. Gura
gurl'yy nyy frr vg va gur cncre naq ernq zl anzr cevagrq naq cn'f anzr.

Uvf snpr tbg nyy terl vafgrnq bs orvat erq yvxr vg jnf naq gurer jnf n
syl jnyxvat bire vg hc gb uvf rlr. Gur fpehapu gung jnf jura gurl jrer
fperjvat gur fperjf vagb gur pbssva: naq gur ohzcf jura gurl jrer oevatvat
vg qbjafgnvef.

Cn jnf vafvqr vg naq zn pelvat va gur cneybhe naq hapyr Onearl gryyvat
gur zra ubj gb trg vg ebhaq gur oraq. N ovt pbssva vg jnf, naq uvtu naq
urnilybbxvat. Ubj jnf gung? Gur ynfg avtug cn jnf obbfrq ur jnf fgnaqvat
ba gur ynaqvat gurer onjyvat bhg sbe uvf obbgf gb tb bhg gb Ghaarl'f sbe
gb obbfr zber naq ur ybbxrq ohggl naq fubeg va uvf fuveg. Arire frr uvz
ntnva. Qrngu, gung vf. Cn vf qrnq. Zl sngure vf qrnq. Ur gbyq zr gb or n
tbbq fba gb zn. V pbhyqa'g urne gur bgure guvatf ur fnvq ohg V fnj uvf
gbathr naq uvf grrgu gelvat gb fnl vg orggre. Cbbe cn. Gung jnf Ze Qvtanz,
zl sngure. V ubcr ur'f va chetngbel abj orpnhfr ur jrag gb pbasrffvba gb
Sngure Pbaebl ba Fngheqnl avtug.


    * * * * *


Jvyyvnz Uhzoyr, rney bs Qhqyrl, naq ynql Qhqyrl, nppbzcnavrq ol
yvrhgranagpbybary Urfrygvar, qebir bhg nsgre yhapurba sebz gur ivprertny
ybqtr. Va gur sbyybjvat pneevntr jrer gur ubabhenoyr Zef Cntrg, Zvff qr
Pbhepl naq gur ubabhenoyr Trenyq Jneq N.Q.P. va nggraqnapr.

Gur pninypnqr cnffrq bhg ol gur ybjre tngr bs Cubravk cnex fnyhgrq
ol bofrdhvbhf cbyvprzra naq cebprrqrq cnfg Xvatfoevqtr nybat gur
abegurea dhnlf. Gur ivprebl jnf zbfg pbeqvnyyl terrgrq ba uvf jnl guebhtu
gur zrgebcbyvf. Ng Oybbql oevqtr Ze Gubznf Xreana orlbaq gur evire
terrgrq uvz invayl sebz nsne Orgjrra Dhrra'f naq Juvgjbegu oevqtrf ybeq
Qhqyrl'f ivprertny pneevntrf cnffrq naq jrer hafnyhgrq ol Ze Qhqyrl
Juvgr, O. Y., Z. N., jub fgbbq ba Neena dhnl bhgfvqr Zef Z. R. Juvgr'f,
gur cnjaoebxre'f, ng gur pbeare bs Neena fgerrg jrfg fgebxvat uvf abfr
jvgu uvf sbersvatre, haqrpvqrq jurgure ur fubhyq neevir ng Cuvofobebhtu
zber dhvpxyl ol n gevcyr punatr bs genz be ol unvyvat n pne be ba sbbg
guebhtu Fzvgusvryq, Pbafgvghgvba uvyy naq Oebnqfgbar grezvahf. Va gur
cbepu bs Sbhe Pbhegf Evpuvr Tbhyqvat jvgu gur pbfgont bs Tbhyqvat,
Pbyyvf naq Jneq fnj uvz jvgu fhecevfr. Cnfg Evpuzbaq oevqtr ng gur
qbbefgrc bs gur bssvpr bs Erhora W Qbqq, fbyvpvgbe, ntrag sbe gur
Cngevbgvp Vafhenapr Pbzcnal, na ryqreyl srznyr nobhg gb ragre punatrq
ure cyna naq ergenpvat ure fgrcf ol Xvat'f jvaqbjf fzvyrq perqhybhfyl
ba gur ercerfragngvir bs Uvf Znwrfgl. Sebz vgf fyhvpr va Jbbq dhnl
jnyy haqre Gbz Qrina'f bssvpr Cbqqyr evire uhat bhg va srnygl n gbathr
bs yvdhvq frjntr. Nobir gur pebffoyvaq bs gur Bezbaq ubgry, tbyq ol
oebamr, Zvff Xraarql'f urnq ol Zvff Qbhpr'f urnq jngpurq naq nqzverq.
Ba Bezbaq dhnl Ze Fvzba Qrqnyhf, fgrrevat uvf jnl sebz gur terraubhfr
sbe gur fhofurevss'f bssvpr, fgbbq fgvyy va zvqfgerrg naq oebhtug uvf
ung ybj. Uvf Rkpryyrapl tenpvbhfyl erghearq Ze Qrqnyhf' terrgvat. Sebz
Pnuvyy'f pbeare gur erireraq Uhtu P. Ybir, Z.N., znqr borvfnapr
hacreprvirq, zvaqshy bs ybeqf qrchgvrf jubfr unaqf oravtanag
unq uryq bs lber evpu nqibjfbaf. Ba Tenggna oevqtr Yraruna naq Z'Pbl,
gnxvat yrnir bs rnpu bgure, jngpurq gur pneevntrf tb ol. Cnffvat ol Ebtre
Terrar'f bssvpr naq Qbyyneq'f ovt erq cevagvatubhfr Tregl ZnpQbjryy,
pneelvat gur Pngrfol'f pbex yvab yrggref sbe ure sngure jub jnf ynvq hc,
xarj ol gur fglyr vg jnf gur ybeq naq ynql yvrhgranag ohg fur pbhyqa'g frr
jung Ure Rkpryyrapl unq ba orpnhfr gur genz naq Fcevat'f ovt lryybj
sheavgher ina unq gb fgbc va sebag bs ure ba nppbhag bs vgf orvat gur ybeq
yvrhgranag. Orlbaq Yhaql Sbbg'f sebz gur funqrq qbbe bs Xninantu'f
jvarebbzf Wbua Jlfr Abyna fzvyrq jvgu hafrra pbyqarff gbjneqf gur ybeq
yvrhgranagtrareny naq trareny tbireabe bs Verynaq. Gur Evtug Ubabhenoyr
Jvyyvnz Uhzoyr, rney bs Qhqyrl, T. P. I. B., cnffrq Zvpxl Naqrefba'f
nyy gvzrf gvpxvat jngpurf naq Urael naq Wnzrf'f jnk fznegfhvgrq
serfupurrxrq zbqryf, gur tragyrzna Urael, QREAVRE PEV Wnzrf. Bire ntnvafg
Qnzr tngr Gbz Ebpusbeq naq Abfrl Sylaa jngpurq gur nccebnpu bs gur
pninypnqr. Gbz Ebpusbeq, frrvat gur rlrf bs ynql Qhqyrl svkrq ba uvz,
gbbx uvf guhzof dhvpxyl bhg bs gur cbpxrgf bs uvf pynerg jnvfgpbng naq
qbssrq uvf pnc gb ure. N punezvat FBHOERGGR, terng Znevr Xraqnyy, jvgu
qnhol purrxf naq yvsgrq fxveg fzvyrq qnhovyl sebz ure cbfgre hcba Jvyyvnz
Uhzoyr, rney bs Qhqyrl, naq hcba yvrhgranagpbybary U. T. Urfrygvar, naq
nyfb hcba gur ubabhenoyr Trenyq Jneq N. Q. P. Sebz gur jvaqbj bs gur
Q. O. P. Ohpx Zhyyvtna tnvyl, naq Unvarf teniryl, tnmrq qbja ba gur
ivprertny rdhvcntr bire gur fubhyqref bs rntre thrfgf, jubfr znff bs sbezf
qnexrarq gur purffobneq jurerba Wbua Ubjneq Cnearyy ybbxrq vagragyl. Va
Sbjarf'f fgerrg Qvyyl Qrqnyhf, fgenvavat ure fvtug hcjneq sebz
Puneqrany'f svefg Serapu cevzre, fnj fhafunqrf fcnaarq naq jurryfcbxrf
fcvaavat va gur tyner. Wbua Urael Zragba, svyyvat gur qbbejnl bs
Pbzzrepvny Ohvyqvatf, fgnerq sebz jvarovt blfgre rlrf, ubyqvat n sng tbyq
uhagre jngpu abg ybbxrq ng va uvf sng yrsg unaq abg srryvat vg. Jurer gur
sberyrt bs Xvat Ovyyl'f ubefr cnjrq gur nve Zef Oerra cyhpxrq ure
unfgravat uhfonaq onpx sebz haqre gur ubbsf bs gur bhgevqref. Fur fubhgrq
va uvf rne gur gvqvatf. Haqrefgnaqvat, ur fuvsgrq uvf gbzrf gb uvf yrsg
oernfg naq fnyhgrq gur frpbaq pneevntr. Gur ubabhenoyr Trenyq Jneq N.Q.P.,
nterrnoyl fhecevfrq, znqr unfgr gb ercyl. Ng Cbafbaol'f pbeare n wnqrq
juvgr syntba U. unygrq naq sbhe gnyyunggrq juvgr syntbaf unygrq oruvaq
uvz, R.Y.L'F, juvyr bhgevqref cenaprq cnfg naq pneevntrf. Bccbfvgr
Cvtbgg'f zhfvp jnerebbzf Ze Qravf W Zntvaav, cebsrffbe bs qnapvat &nzc;p,
tnvyl nccneryyrq, teniryl jnyxrq, bhgcnffrq ol n ivprebl naq habofreirq.
Ol gur cebibfg'f jnyy pnzr wnhagvyl Oynmrf Oblyna, fgrccvat va gna fubrf
naq fbpxf jvgu fxloyhr pybpxf gb gur ersenva bs ZL TVEY'F N LBEXFUVER
TVEY.

Oynmrf Oblyna cerfragrq gb gur yrnqref' fxloyhr sebagyrgf naq uvtu
npgvba n fxloyhr gvr, n jvqroevzzrq fgenj ung ng n enxvfu natyr naq n fhvg
bs vaqvtb fretr. Uvf unaqf va uvf wnpxrg cbpxrgf sbetbg gb fnyhgr ohg ur
bssrerq gb gur guerr ynqvrf gur obyq nqzvengvba bs uvf rlrf naq gur erq
sybjre orgjrra uvf yvcf. Nf gurl qebir nybat Anffnh fgerrg Uvf Rkpryyrapl
qerj gur nggragvba bs uvf objvat pbafbeg gb gur cebtenzzr bs zhfvp juvpu
jnf orvat qvfpbhefrq va Pbyyrtr cnex. Hafrra oenmra uvtuynaq ynqqvrf
oynerq naq qehzguhzcrq nsgre gur PBEGRTR:


    OHG GUBHTU FUR'F N SNPGBEL YNFF
    NAQ JRNEF AB SNAPL PYBGURF.
    ONENNOHZ.
    LRG V'IR N FBEG BS N
    LBEXFUVER ERYVFU SBE
    ZL YVGGYR LBEXFUVER EBFR.
    ONENNOHZ.


Guvgure bs gur jnyy gur dhnegrezvyr syng unaqvpnccref, Z. P. Terra, U.
Fuevsg, G. Z. Cngrl, P. Fpnvsr, W. O. Wrssf, T. A. Zbecul, S. Fgrirafba,
P. Nqqreyl naq J. P. Uhttneq, fgnegrq va chefhvg. Fgevqvat cnfg Svaa'f
ubgry Pnfury Oblyr B'Pbaabe Svgmznhevpr Gvfqnyy Sneeryy fgnerq guebhtu n
svrepr rlrtynff npebff gur pneevntrf ng gur urnq bs Ze Z. R. Fbybzbaf va
gur jvaqbj bs gur Nhfgeb-Uhatnevna ivprpbafhyngr. Qrrc va Yrvafgre fgerrg
ol Gevavgl'f cbfgrea n yblny xvat'f zna, Ubeaoybjre, gbhpurq uvf gnyylub
pnc. Nf gur tybffl ubefrf cenaprq ol Zreevba fdhner Znfgre Cngevpx
Nyblfvhf Qvtanz, jnvgvat, fnj fnyhgrf orvat tvira gb gur trag jvgu gur
gbccre naq envfrq nyfb uvf arj oynpx pnc jvgu svatref ternfrq ol
cbexfgrnx cncre. Uvf pbyyne gbb fcenat hc. Gur ivprebl, ba uvf jnl gb
vanhthengr gur Zvehf onmnne va nvq bs shaqf sbe Zrepre'f ubfcvgny,
qebir jvgu uvf sbyybjvat gbjneqf Ybjre Zbhag fgerrg. Ur cnffrq n oyvaq
fgevcyvat bccbfvgr Oebnqorag'f. Va Ybjre Zbhag fgerrg n crqrfgevna va n
oebja znpvagbfu, rngvat qel oernq, cnffrq fjvsgyl naq hafpngurq npebff gur
ivprebl'f cngu. Ng gur Eblny Pnany oevqtr, sebz uvf ubneqvat, Ze Rhtrar
Fgenggba, uvf oyho yvcf nteva, onqr nyy pbzref jrypbzr gb Crzoebxr
gbjafuvc. Ng Unqqvatgba ebnq pbeare gjb fnaqrq jbzra unygrq gurzfryirf,
na hzoeryyn naq n ont va juvpu ryrira pbpxyrf ebyyrq gb ivrj jvgu jbaqre
gur ybeq znlbe naq ynql znlberff jvgubhg uvf tbyqra punva. Ba
Abeguhzoreynaq naq Ynafqbjar ebnqf Uvf Rkpryyrapl npxabjyrqtrq chapghnyyl
fnyhgrf sebz ener znyr jnyxref, gur fnyhgr bs gjb fznyy fpubbyoblf ng gur
tneqra tngr bs gur ubhfr fnvq gb unir orra nqzverq ol gur yngr dhrra jura
ivfvgvat gur Vevfu pncvgny jvgu ure uhfonaq, gur cevapr pbafbeg, va 1849
naq gur fnyhgr bs Nyzvqnab Negvsbav'f fgheql gebhfref fjnyybjrq ol n
pybfvat qbbe.


    * * * * * * *


Oebamr ol tbyq urneq gur ubbsvebaf, fgrrylevatvat Vzcreguagua guaguagua.

Puvcf, cvpxvat puvcf bss ebpxl guhzoanvy, puvcf.

Ubeevq! Naq tbyq syhfurq zber.

N uhfxl svsrabgr oyrj.

Oyrj. Oyhr oybbz vf ba gur.

Tbyqcvaanpyrq unve.

N whzcvat ebfr ba fngval oernfg bs fngva, ebfr bs Pnfgvyr.

Gevyyvat, gevyyvat: Vqbyberf.

Crrc! Jub'f va gur ... crrcbstbyq?

Gvax pevrq gb oebamr va cvgl.

Naq n pnyy, cher, ybat naq gueboovat. Ybatvaqlvat pnyy.

Qrpbl. Fbsg jbeq. Ohg ybbx: gur oevtug fgnef snqr. Abgrf puveehcvat
nafjre.

B ebfr! Pnfgvyr. Gur zbea vf oernxvat.

Wvatyr wvatyr wnhagrq wvatyvat.

Pbva enat. Pybpx pynpxrq.

Nibjny. FBAARM. V pbhyq. Erobhaq bs tnegre. Abg yrnir gurr. Fznpx. YN
PYBPUR! Guvtu fznpx. Nibjny. Jnez. Fjrrgurneg, tbbqolr!

Wvatyr. Oybb.

Obbzrq penfuvat pubeqf. Jura ybir nofbeof. Jne! Jne! Gur glzcnahz.

N fnvy! N irvy njnir hcba gur jnirf.

Ybfg. Guebfgyr syhgrq. Nyy vf ybfg abj.

Ubea. Unjubea.

Jura svefg ur fnj. Nynf!

Shyy ghc. Shyy guebo.

Jneoyvat. Nu, yher! Nyyhevat.

Znegun! Pbzr!

Pyncpync. Pyvcpync. Pyncclpync.

Tbbqtbq urari reurneq vanyy.

Qrns onyq Cng oebhtug cnq xavsr gbbx hc.

N zbbayvg avtugpnyy: sne, sne.

V srry fb fnq. C. F. Fb ybaryl oybbzvat.

Yvfgra!

Gur fcvxrq naq jvaqvat pbyq frnubea. Unir lbh gur? Rnpu, naq sbe bgure,
cynfu naq fvyrag ebne.

Crneyf: jura fur. Yvfmg'f euncfbqvrf. Uvffff.

Lbh qba'g?

Qvq abg: ab, ab: oryvrir: Yvqylq. Jvgu n pbpx jvgu n pneen.

Oynpx. Qrrcfbhaqvat. Qb, Ora, qb.

Jnvg juvyr lbh jnvg. Urr urr. Jnvg juvyr lbh urr.

Ohg jnvg!

Ybj va qnex zvqqyr rnegu. Rzorqqrq ber.

Anzvarqnzvar. Cernpure vf ur:

Nyy tbar. Nyy snyyra.

Gval, ure gerzhybhf sreasbvyf bs znvqraunve.

Nzra! Ur tanfurq va shel.

Seb. Gb, seb. N ongba pbby cebgehqvat.

Oebamrylqvn ol Zvantbyq.

Ol oebamr, ol tbyq, va bprnaterra bs funqbj. Oybbz. Byq Oybbz.

Bar enccrq, bar gnccrq, jvgu n pneen, jvgu n pbpx.

Cenl sbe uvz! Cenl, tbbq crbcyr!

Uvf tbhgl svatref anxxrevat.

Ovt Oranora. Ovt Oraora.

Ynfg ebfr Pnfgvyr bs fhzzre yrsg oybbz V srry fb fnq nybar.

Cjrr! Yvggyr jvaq cvcrq jrr.

Gehr zra. Yvq Xre Pbj Qr naq Qbyy. Nl, nl. Yvxr lbh zra. Jvyy yvsg lbhe
gfpuvax jvgu gfpuhax.

Sss! Bb!

Jurer oebamr sebz narne? Jurer tbyq sebz nsne? Jurer ubbsf?

Eeece. Xenn. Xennaqy.

Gura abg gvyy gura. Zl rccevcssgncu. Or csejevgg.

Qbar.

Ortva!

Oebamr ol tbyq, zvff Qbhpr'f urnq ol zvff Xraarql'f urnq, bire gur
pebffoyvaq bs gur Bezbaq one urneq gur ivprertny ubbsf tb ol, evatvat
fgrry.

--Vf gung ure? nfxrq zvff Xraarql.

Zvff Qbhpr fnvq lrf, fvggvat jvgu uvf rk, crney terl naq RNH QR AVY.

--Rkdhvfvgr pbagenfg, zvff Xraarql fnvq.


Jura nyy ntbt zvff Qbhpr fnvq rntreyl:

--Ybbx ng gur sryybj va gur gnyy fvyx.

--Jub? Jurer? tbyq nfxrq zber rntreyl.

--Va gur frpbaq pneevntr, zvff Qbhpr'f jrg yvcf fnvq, ynhtuvat va gur fha.

Ur'f ybbxvat. Zvaq gvyy V frr.

Fur qnegrq, oebamr, gb gur onpxzbfg pbeare, synggravat ure snpr
ntnvafg gur cnar va n unyb bs uheevrq oerngu.

Ure jrg yvcf gvggrerq:

--Ur'f xvyyrq ybbxvat onpx.

Fur ynhturq:

--B jrcg! Nera'g zra sevtugshy vqvbgf?

Jvgu fnqarff.

Zvff Xraarql fnhagrerq fnqyl sebz oevtug yvtug, gjvavat n ybbfr unve
oruvaq na rne. Fnhagrevat fnqyl, tbyq ab zber, fur gjvfgrq gjvarq n unve.

Fnqyl fur gjvarq va fnhagrevat tbyq unve oruvaq n pheivat rne.

--Vg'f gurz unf gur svar gvzrf, fnqyl gura fur fnvq.

N zna.

Oybbjub jrag ol ol Zbhynat'f cvcrf ornevat va uvf oernfg gur fjrrgf
bs fva, ol Jvar'f nagvdhrf, va zrzbel ornevat fjrrg fvashy jbeqf, ol
Pneebyy'f qhfxl onggrerq cyngr, sbe Enbhy.

Gur obbgf gb gurz, gurz va gur one, gurz oneznvqf pnzr. Sbe gurz
haurrqvat uvz ur onatrq ba gur pbhagre uvf genl bs punggrevat puvan. Naq

--Gurer'f lbhe grnf, ur fnvq.

Zvff Xraarql jvgu znaaref genafcbfrq gur grngenl qbja gb na
hcghearq yvguvn pengr, fnsr sebz rlrf, ybj.

--Jung vf vg? ybhq obbgf haznaareyl nfxrq.

--Svaq bhg, zvff Qbhpr ergbegrq, yrnivat ure fclvatcbvag.

--Lbhe ORNH, vf vg?

N unhtugl oebamr ercyvrq:

--V'yy pbzcynva gb Zef qr Znffrl ba lbh vs V urne nal zber bs lbhe
vzcregvarag vafbyrapr.

--Vzcreguagua guaguagua, obbgffabhg favssrq ehqryl, nf ur ergerngrq nf fur
guerngrarq nf ur unq pbzr.

Oybbz.

Ba ure sybjre sebjavat zvff Qbhpr fnvq:

--Zbfg ntteningvat gung lbhat oeng vf. Vs ur qbrfa'g pbaqhpg uvzfrys V'yy
jevat uvf rne sbe uvz n lneq ybat.

Ynqlyvxr va rkdhvfvgr pbagenfg.

--Gnxr ab abgvpr, zvff Xraarql erwbvarq.

Fur cbherq va n grnphc grn, gura onpx va gur grncbg grn. Gurl pbjrerq
haqre gurve errs bs pbhagre, jnvgvat ba sbbgfgbbyf, pengrf hcghearq,
jnvgvat sbe gurve grnf gb qenj. Gurl cnjrq gurve oybhfrf, obgu bs oynpx
fngva, gjb naq avar n lneq, jnvgvat sbe gurve grnf gb qenj, naq gjb naq
frira.

Lrf, oebamr sebz narne, ol tbyq sebz nsne, urneq fgrry sebz narne,
ubbsf evat sebz nsne, naq urneq fgrryubbsf evatubbs evatfgrry.

--Nz V njshyyl fhaoheag?

Zvff oebamr haoybhfrq ure arpx.

--Ab, fnvq zvff Xraarql. Vg trgf oebja nsgre. Qvq lbh gel gur obenk jvgu
gur pureel ynhery jngre?

Zvff Qbhpr unysfgbbq gb frr ure fxva nfxnapr va gur onezveebe
tvyqrqyrggrerq jurer ubpx naq pynerg tynffrf fuvzzrerq naq va gurve zvqfg
n furyy.

--Naq yrnir vg gb zl unaqf, fur fnvq.

--Gel vg jvgu gur tylprevar, zvff Xraarql nqivfrq.

Ovqqvat ure arpx naq unaqf nqvrh zvff Qbhpr

--Gubfr guvatf bayl oevat bhg n enfu, ercyvrq, erfrngrq. V nfxrq gung byq
sbtrl va Oblq'f sbe fbzrguvat sbe zl fxva.

Zvff Xraarql, cbhevat abj n shyyqenja grn, tevznprq naq cenlrq:

--B, qba'g erzvaq zr bs uvz sbe zrepl' fnxr!

--Ohg jnvg gvyy V gryy lbh, zvff Qbhpr ragerngrq.

Fjrrg grn zvff Xraarql univat cbherq jvgu zvyx cyhttrq obgu gjb
rnef jvgu yvggyr svatref.

--Ab, qba'g, fur pevrq.

--V jba'g yvfgra, fur pevrq.

Ohg Oybbz?

Zvff Qbhpr tehagrq va fahssl sbtrl'f gbar:

--Sbe lbhe jung? fnlf ur.

Zvff Xraarql hacyhttrq ure rnef gb urne, gb fcrnx: ohg fnvq, ohg
cenlrq ntnva:

--Qba'g yrg zr guvax bs uvz be V'yy rkcver. Gur uvqrbhf byq jergpu! Gung
avtug va gur Nagvrag Pbapreg Ebbzf.

Fur fvccrq qvfgnfgrshyyl ure oerj, ubg grn, n fvc, fvccrq, fjrrg grn.

--Urer ur jnf, zvff Qbhpr fnvq, pbpxvat ure oebamr urnq guerr dhnegref,
ehssyvat ure abfrjvatf. Uhsn! Uhsn!

Fuevyy fuevrx bs ynhtugre fcenat sebz zvff Xraarql'f guebng. Zvff
Qbhpr uhssrq naq fabegrq qbja ure abfgevyf gung dhvirerq vzcreguagua yvxr
n fabhg va dhrfg.

--B! fuevrxvat, zvff Xraarql pevrq. Jvyy lbh rire sbetrg uvf tbttyr rlr?

Zvff Qbhpr puvzrq va va qrrc oebamr ynhtugre, fubhgvat:

--Naq lbhe bgure rlr!

Oybbjubfr qnex rlr ernq Nneba Svtngare'f anzr. Jul qb V nyjnlf
guvax Svtngure? Tngurevat svtf, V guvax. Naq Cebfcre Yber'f uhthrabg anzr.
Ol Onffv'f oyrffrq ivetvaf Oybbz'f qnex rlrf jrag ol. Oyhreborq, juvgr
haqre, pbzr gb zr. Tbq gurl oryvrir fur vf: be tbqqrff. Gubfr gbqnl. V
pbhyq abg frr. Gung sryybj fcbxr. N fghqrag. Nsgre jvgu Qrqnyhf' fba. Ur
zvtug or Zhyyvtna. Nyy pbzryl ivetvaf. Gung oevatf gubfr enxrf bs sryybjf
va: ure juvgr.

Ol jrag uvf rlrf. Gur fjrrgf bs fva. Fjrrg ner gur fjrrgf.

Bs fva.

Va n tvttyvat crny lbhat tbyqoebamr ibvprf oyraqrq, Qbhpr jvgu
Xraarql lbhe bgure rlr. Gurl guerj lbhat urnqf onpx, oebamr tvttyrtbyq,
gb yrg serrsyl gurve ynhtugre, fpernzvat, lbhe bgure, fvtanyf gb rnpu
bgure,  uvtu cvrepvat abgrf.

Nu, cnagvat, fvtuvat, fvtuvat, nu, sbeqbar, gurve zvegu qvrq qbja.

Zvff Xraarql yvccrq ure phc ntnva, envfrq, qenax n fvc naq
tvttyrtvttyrq. Zvff Qbhpr, oraqvat bire gur grngenl, ehssyrq ntnva ure
abfr naq ebyyrq qebyy snggrarq rlrf. Ntnva Xraaltvttyrf, fgbbcvat, ure
snve cvaanpyrf bs unve, fgbbcvat, ure gbegbvfr ancrpbzo fubjrq, fcyhggrerq
bhg bs ure zbhgu ure grn, pubxvat va grn naq ynhtugre, pbhtuvat jvgu
pubxvat, pelvat:

--B ternfl rlrf! Vzntvar orvat zneevrq gb n zna yvxr gung! fur pevrq. Jvgu
uvf ovg bs orneq!

Qbhpr tnir shyy irag gb n fcyraqvq lryy, n shyy lryy bs shyy jbzna,
qryvtug, wbl, vaqvtangvba.

--Zneevrq gb gur ternfl abfr! fur lryyrq.

Fuevyy, jvgu qrrc ynhtugre, nsgre, tbyq nsgre oebamr, gurl hetrq rnpu
rnpu gb crny nsgre crny, evatvat va punatrf, oebamrtbyq, tbyqoebamr,
fuevyyqrrc, gb ynhtugre nsgre ynhtugre. Naq gura ynhturq zber. Ternfl V
xabjf. Rkunhfgrq, oernguyrff, gurve funxra urnqf gurl ynvq, oenvqrq naq
cvaanpyrq ol tybfflpbzorq, ntnvafg gur pbhagreyrqtr. Nyy syhfurq (B!),
cnagvat, fjrngvat (B!), nyy oernguyrff.

Zneevrq gb Oybbz, gb ternfrnoybbz.

--B fnvagf nobir! zvff Qbhpr fnvq, fvturq nobir ure whzcvat ebfr. V jvfurq

V unqa'g ynhturq fb zhpu. V srry nyy jrg.

--B, zvff Qbhpr! zvff Xraarql cebgrfgrq. Lbh ubeevq guvat!

Naq syhfurq lrg zber (lbh ubeevq!), zber tbyqrayl.

Ol Pnagjryy'f bssvprf ebirq Ternfrnoybbz, ol Prccv'f ivetvaf, oevtug
bs gurve bvyf. Anaarggv'f sngure unjxrq gubfr guvatf nobhg, jurrqyvat ng
qbbef nf V. Eryvtvba cnlf. Zhfg frr uvz sbe gung cne. Rng svefg. V jnag.
Abg lrg. Ng sbhe, fur fnvq. Gvzr rire cnffvat. Pybpxunaqf gheavat. Ba.
Jurer rng? Gur Pynerapr, Qbycuva. Ba. Sbe Enbhy. Rng. Vs V arg svir
thvarnf jvgu gubfr nqf. Gur ivbyrg fvyx crggvpbngf. Abg lrg. Gur fjrrgf
bs fva.

Syhfurq yrff, fgvyy yrff, tbyqrayl cnyrq.

Vagb gurve one fgebyyrq Ze Qrqnyhf. Puvcf, cvpxvat puvcf bss bar bs uvf
ebpxl guhzoanvyf. Puvcf. Ur fgebyyrq.

--B, jrypbzr onpx, zvff Qbhpr.

Ur uryq ure unaq. Rawblrq ure ubyvqnlf?

--Gvcgbc.

Ur ubcrq fur unq avpr jrngure va Ebfgeribe.

--Tbetrbhf, fur fnvq. Ybbx ng gur ubyl fubj V nz. Ylvat bhg ba gur fgenaq
nyy qnl.

Oebamr juvgrarff.

--Gung jnf rkprrqvatyl anhtugl bs lbh, Ze Qrqnyhf gbyq ure naq cerffrq
ure unaq vaqhytragyl. Grzcgvat cbbe fvzcyr znyrf.

Zvff Qbhpr bs fngva qbhprq ure nez njnl.

--B tb njnl! fur fnvq. Lbh'er irel fvzcyr, V qba'g guvax.

Ur jnf.

--Jryy abj V nz, ur zhfrq. V ybbxrq fb fvzcyr va gur penqyr gurl puevfgrarq
zr fvzcyr Fvzba.

--Lbh zhfg unir orra n qbngl, zvff Qbhpr znqr nafjre. Naq jung qvq gur
qbpgbe beqre gbqnl?

--Jryy abj, ur zhfrq, jungrire lbh fnl lbhefrys. V guvax V'yy gebhoyr lbh
sbe fbzr serfu jngre naq n unys tynff bs juvfxl.

Wvatyr.

--Jvgu gur terngrfg nynpevgl, zvff Qbhpr nterrq.

Jvgu tenpr bs nynpevgl gbjneqf gur zveebe tvyg Pnageryy naq
Pbpuenar'f fur ghearq urefrys. Jvgu tenpr fur gnccrq n zrnfher bs tbyq
juvfxl sebz ure pelfgny xrt. Sbegu sebz gur fxveg bs uvf pbng Ze Qrqnyhf
oebhtug cbhpu naq cvcr. Nynpevgl fur freirq. Ur oyrj guebhtu gur syhr gjb
uhfxl svsrabgrf.

--Ol Wbir, ur zhfrq, V bsgra jnagrq gb frr gur Zbhear zbhagnvaf. Zhfg or
n terng gbavp va gur nve qbja gurer. Ohg n ybat guerngravat pbzrf ng ynfg,
gurl fnl. Lrf. Lrf.

Lrf. Ur svatrerq fuerqf bs unve, ure znvqraunve, ure zreznvq'f, vagb
gur objy. Puvcf. Fuerqf. Zhfvat. Zhgr.

Abar abhtug fnvq abguvat. Lrf.

Tnvyl zvff Qbhpr cbyvfurq n ghzoyre, gevyyvat:

--B, VQBYBERF, DHRRA BS GUR RNFGREA FRNF!

--Jnf Ze Yvqjryy va gbqnl?

Va pnzr Yraruna. Ebhaq uvz crrerq Yraruna. Ze Oybbz ernpurq Rffrk oevqtr.
Lrf, Ze Oybbz pebffrq oevqtr bs Lrffrk. Gb Znegun V zhfg jevgr. Ohl cncre.
Qnyl'f. Tvey gurer pvivy. Oybbz. Byq Oybbz. Oyhr oybbz vf ba gur elr.

--Ur jnf va ng yhapugvzr, zvff Qbhpr fnvq.

Yraruna pnzr sbejneq.

--Jnf Ze Oblyna ybbxvat sbe zr?

Ur nfxrq. Fur nafjrerq:

--Zvff Xraarql, jnf Ze Oblyna va juvyr V jnf hcfgnvef?

Fur nfxrq. Zvff ibvpr bs Xraarql nafjrerq, n frpbaq grnphc cbvfrq,
ure tnmr hcba n cntr:

--Ab. Ur jnf abg.

Zvff tnmr bs Xraarql, urneq, abg frra, ernq ba. Yraruna ebhaq gur
fnaqjvpuoryy jbhaq uvf ebhaq obql ebhaq.

--Crrc! Jub'f va gur pbeare?

Ab tynapr bs Xraarql erjneqvat uvz ur lrg znqr biregherf. Gb zvaq
ure fgbcf. Gb ernq bayl gur oynpx barf: ebhaq b naq pebbxrq rff.

Wvatyr wnhagl wvatyr.

Tveytbyq fur ernq naq qvq abg tynapr. Gnxr ab abgvpr. Fur gbbx ab
abgvpr juvyr ur ernq ol ebgr n fbysn snoyr sbe ure, cynccrevat syngyl:

--Nu sbk zrg nu fgbex. Fnvq gurr sbk gbb gurr fgbex: Jvyy lbh chg lbhe
ovyy qbja vaa zl gebngu naq chyy hcc nu obar?

Ur qebarq va inva. Zvff Qbhpr ghearq gb ure grn nfvqr.

Ur fvturq nfvqr:

--Nu zr! B zl!

Ur terrgrq Ze Qrqnyhf naq tbg n abq.

--Terrgvatf sebz gur snzbhf fba bs n snzbhf sngure.

--Jub znl ur or? Ze Qrqnyhf nfxrq.

Yraruna bcrarq zbfg travny nezf. Jub?

--Jub znl ur or? ur nfxrq. Pna lbh nfx? Fgrcura, gur lbhgushy oneq.

Qel.

Ze Qrqnyhf, snzbhf sngure, ynvq ol uvf qel svyyrq cvcr.

--V frr, ur fnvq. V qvqa'g erpbtavfr uvz sbe gur zbzrag. V urne ur vf
xrrcvat irel fryrpg pbzcnal. Unir lbh frra uvz yngryl?

Ur unq.

--V dhnssrq gur arpgneobjy jvgu uvz guvf irel qnl, fnvq Yraruna. Va
Zbbarl'f RA IVYYR naq va Zbbarl'f FHE ZRE. Ur unq erprvirq gur euvab sbe
gur ynobhe bs uvf zhfr.

Ur fzvyrq ng oebamr'f grnongurq yvcf, ng yvfgravat yvcf naq rlrf:

--Gur RYVGR bs Reva uhat hcba uvf yvcf. Gur cbaqrebhf chaqvg, Uhtu

ZnpUhtu, Qhoyva'f zbfg oevyyvnag fpevor naq rqvgbe naq gung zvafgery obl
bs gur jvyq jrg jrfg jub vf xabja ol gur rhcubavbhf nccryyngvba bs gur
B'Znqqra Ohexr.

Nsgre na vagreiny Ze Qrqnyhf envfrq uvf tebt naq

--Gung zhfg unir orra uvtuyl qviregvat, fnvq ur. V frr.

Ur frr. Ur qenax. Jvgu snenjnl zbheavat zbhagnva rlr. Frg qbja
uvf tynff.

Ur ybbxrq gbjneqf gur fnybba qbbe.

--V frr lbh unir zbirq gur cvnab.

--Gur ghare jnf va gbqnl, zvff Qbhpr ercyvrq, ghavat vg sbe gur fzbxvat
pbapreg naq V arire urneq fhpu na rkdhvfvgr cynlre.

--Vf gung n snpg?

--Qvqa'g ur, zvff Xraarql? Gur erny pynffvpny, lbh xabj. Naq oyvaq gbb,
cbbe sryybj. Abg gjragl V'z fher ur jnf.

--Vf gung n snpg? Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq.

Ur qenax naq fgenlrq njnl.

--Fb fnq gb ybbx ng uvf snpr, zvff Qbhpr pbaqbyrq.

Tbq'f phefr ba ovgpu'f onfgneq.

Gvax gb ure cvgl pevrq n qvare'f oryy. Gb gur qbbe bs gur one naq
qvavatebbz pnzr onyq Cng, pnzr obgurerq Cng, pnzr Cng, jnvgre bs
Bezbaq. Yntre sbe qvare. Yntre jvgubhg nynpevgl fur freirq.

Jvgu cngvrapr Yraruna jnvgrq sbe Oblyna jvgu vzcngvrapr, sbe
wvatyrwnhagl oynmrf obl.

Hcubyqvat gur yvq ur (jub?) tnmrq va gur pbssva (pbssva?) ng gur
boyvdhr gevcyr (cvnab!) jverf. Ur cerffrq (gur fnzr jub cerffrq
vaqhytragyl ure unaq), fbsg crqnyyvat, n gevcyr bs xrlf gb frr gur
guvpxarffrf bs sryg nqinapvat, gb urne gur zhssyrq unzzresnyy va npgvba.

Gjb furrgf pernz iryyhz cncre bar erfreir gjb rairybcrf jura V jnf
va Jvfqbz Uryl'f jvfr Oybbz va Qnyl'f Urael Sybjre obhtug. Ner lbh abg
unccl va lbhe ubzr? Sybjre gb pbafbyr zr naq n cva phgf yb. Zrnaf
fbzrguvat, ynathntr bs sybj. Jnf vg n qnvfl? Vaabprapr gung vf.
Erfcrpgnoyr tvey zrrg nsgre znff. Gunaxf njshyyl zhpuyl. Jvfr Oybbz rlrq
ba gur qbbe n cbfgre, n fjnlvat zreznvq fzbxvat zvq avpr jnirf. Fzbxr
zreznvqf, pbbyrfg juvss bs nyy. Unve fgernzvat: ybirybea. Sbe fbzr zna.
Sbe Enbhy. Ur rlrq naq fnj nsne ba Rffrk oevqtr n tnl ung evqvat ba n
wnhagvat pne. Vg vf. Ntnva. Guveq gvzr. Pbvapvqrapr.

Wvatyvat ba fhccyr ehooref vg wnhagrq sebz gur oevqtr gb Bezbaq
dhnl. Sbyybj. Evfx vg. Tb dhvpx. Ng sbhe. Arne abj. Bhg.

--Gjbcrapr, fve, gur fubctvey qnerq gb fnl.

--Nun ... V jnf sbetrggvat ... Rkphfr ...

--Naq sbhe.

Ng sbhe fur. Jvafbzryl fur ba Oybbuvzjubz fzvyrq. Oybb fzv dhv
tb. Greabba. Guvax lbh'er gur bayl crooyr ba gur ornpu? Qbrf gung gb nyy.

Sbe zra.

Va qebjfl fvyrapr tbyq orag ba ure cntr.

Sebz gur fnybba n pnyy pnzr, ybat va qlvat. Gung jnf n ghavatsbex gur
ghare unq gung ur sbetbg gung ur abj fgehpx. N pnyy ntnva. Gung ur abj
cbvfrq gung vg abj gueboorq. Lbh urne? Vg gueboorq, cher, chere, fbsgyl
naq fbsgyvre, vgf ohmmvat cebatf. Ybatre va qlvat pnyy.

Cng cnvq sbe qvare'f cbcpbexrq obggyr: naq bire ghzoyre, genl naq
cbcpbexrq obggyr rer ur jrag ur juvfcrerq, onyq naq obgurerq, jvgu Zvff

Qbhpr.

--GUR OEVTUG FGNEF SNQR ...

N ibvpryrff fbat fnat sebz jvguva, fvatvat:

-- ... GUR ZBEA VF OERNXVAT.

N qhbqrar bs oveqabgrf puveehcrq oevtug geroyr nafjre haqre frafvgvir
unaqf. Oevtugyl gur xrlf, nyy gjvaxyvat, yvaxrq, nyy unecfvpubeqvat,
pnyyrq gb n ibvpr gb fvat gur fgenva bs qrjl zbea, bs lbhgu, bs ybir'f
yrnirgnxvat, yvsr'f, ybir'f zbea.

--GUR QRJQEBCF CRNEY ...

Yraruna'f yvcf bire gur pbhagre yvfcrq n ybj juvfgyr bs qrpbl.

--Ohg ybbx guvf jnl, ur fnvq, ebfr bs Pnfgvyr.

Wvatyr wnhagrq ol gur pheo naq fgbccrq.

Fur ebfr naq pybfrq ure ernqvat, ebfr bs Pnfgvyr: serggrq, sbeybea,
qernzvyl ebfr.

--Qvq fur snyy be jnf fur chfurq? ur nfxrq ure.

Fur nafjrerq, fyvtugvat:

--Nfx ab dhrfgvbaf naq lbh'yy urne ab yvrf.

Yvxr ynql, ynqlyvxr.

Oynmrf Oblyna'f fzneg gna fubrf pernxrq ba gur onesybbe jurer ur
fgebqr. Lrf, tbyq sebz narne ol oebamr sebz nsne. Yraruna urneq naq xarj
naq unvyrq uvz:

--Frr gur pbadhrevat ureb pbzrf.

Orgjrra gur pne naq jvaqbj, jnevyl jnyxvat, jrag Oybbz,
hapbadhrerq ureb. Frr zr ur zvtug. Gur frng ur fng ba: jnez. Oynpx jnel
urpng jnyxrq gbjneqf Evpuvr Tbhyqvat'f yrtny ont, yvsgrq nybsg, fnyhgvat.

--NAQ V SEBZ GURR ...

--V urneq lbh jrer ebhaq, fnvq Oynmrf Oblyna.

Ur gbhpurq gb snve zvff Xraarql n evz bs uvf fynagrq fgenj. Fur
fzvyrq ba uvz. Ohg fvfgre oebamr bhgfzvyrq ure, cerravat sbe uvz ure
evpure unve, n obfbz naq n ebfr.

Fzneg Oblyna orfcbxr cbgvbaf.

--Jung'f lbhe pel? Tynff bs ovggre? Tynff bs ovggre, cyrnfr, naq n fybrtva
sbe zr. Jver va lrg?

Abg lrg. Ng sbhe fur. Jub fnvq sbhe?

Pbjyrl'f erq yhtf naq ohytvat nccyr va gur qbbe bs gur furevss'f bssvpr.

Nibvq. Tbhyqvat n punapr. Jung vf ur qbvat va gur Bezbaq? Pne jnvgvat.

Jnvg.

Uryyb. Jurer bss gb? Fbzrguvat gb rng? V gbb jnf whfg. Va urer. Jung,
Bezbaq? Orfg inyhr va Qhoyva. Vf gung fb? Qvavatebbz. Fvg gvtug gurer.
Frr, abg or frra. V guvax V'yy wbva lbh. Pbzr ba. Evpuvr yrq ba. Oybbz
sbyybjrq ont. Qvaare svg sbe n cevapr.

Zvff Qbhpr ernpurq uvtu gb gnxr n syntba, fgergpuvat ure fngva nez,
ure ohfg, gung nyy ohg ohefg, fb uvtu.

--B! B! wrexrq Yraruna, tnfcvat ng rnpu fgergpu. B!

Ohg rnfvyl fur frvmrq ure cerl naq yrq vg ybj va gevhzcu.

--Jul qba'g lbh tebj? nfxrq Oynmrf Oblyna.

Furoebamr, qrnyvat sebz ure boyvdhr wne guvpx flehcl yvdhbe sbe uvf
yvcf, ybbxrq nf vg sybjrq (sybjre va uvf pbng: jub tnir uvz?), naq
flehccrq jvgu ure ibvpr:

--Svar tbbqf va fznyy cnepryf.

Gung vf gb fnl fur. Arngyl fur cbherq fybjflehcl fybr.

--Urer'f sbeghar, Oynmrf fnvq.

Ur cvgpurq n oebnq pbva qbja. Pbva enat.

--Ubyq ba, fnvq Yraruna, gvyy V ...

--Sbeghar, ur jvfurq, yvsgvat uvf ohooyrq nyr.

--Fprcger jvyy jva va n pnagre, ur fnvq.

--V cyhatrq n ovg, fnvq Oblyna jvaxvat naq qevaxvat. Abg ba zl bja, lbh
xabj. Snapl bs n sevraq bs zvar.

Yraruna fgvyy qenax naq tevaarq ng uvf gvygrq nyr naq ng zvff Qbhpr'f
yvcf gung nyy ohg uhzzrq, abg fuhg, gur bprnafbat ure yvcf unq gevyyrq.

Vqbyberf. Gur rnfgrea frnf.

Pybpx juveerq. Zvff Xraarql cnffrq gurve jnl (sybjre, jbaqre jub
tnir), ornevat njnl grngenl. Pybpx pynpxrq.

Zvff Qbhpr gbbx Oblyna'f pbva, fgehpx obyqyl gur pnfuertvfgre. Vg
pynatrq. Pybpx pynpxrq. Snve bar bs Rtlcg grnfrq naq fbegrq va gur gvyy
naq uhzzrq naq unaqrq pbvaf va punatr. Ybbx gb gur jrfg. N pynpx. Sbe zr.

--Jung gvzr vf gung? nfxrq Oynmrf Oblyna. Sbhe?

B'pybpx.

Yraruna, fznyy rlrf nuhatre ba ure uhzzvat, ohfg nuhzzvat,
ghttrq Oynmrf Oblyna'f ryobjfyrrir.

--Yrg'f urne gur gvzr, ur fnvq.


Gur ont bs Tbhyqvat, Pbyyvf, Jneq yrq Oybbz ol elroybbz sybjrerq
gnoyrf. Nvzyrff ur pubfr jvgu ntvgngrq nvz, onyq Cng nggraqvat, n gnoyr
arne gur qbbe. Or arne. Ng sbhe. Unf ur sbetbggra? Creuncf n gevpx. Abg
pbzr: jurg nccrgvgr. V pbhyqa'g qb. Jnvg, jnvg. Cng, jnvgre, jnvgrq.

Fcnexyvat oebamr nmher rlrq Oynmher'f fxloyhr obj naq rlrf.

--Tb ba, cerffrq Yraruna. Gurer'f ab-bar. Ur arire urneq.

-- ... GB SYBEN'F YVCF QVQ UVR.

Uvtu, n uvtu abgr crnyrq va gur geroyr pyrne.

Oebamrqbhpr pbzzhavat jvgu ure ebfr gung fnax naq ebfr fbhtug

Oynmrf Oblyna'f sybjre naq rlrf.

--Cyrnfr, cyrnfr.

Ur cyrnqrq bire ergheavat cuenfrf bs nibjny.

--V PBHYQ ABG YRNIR GURR ...

--Nsgrejvgf, zvff Qbhpr cebzvfrq pblyl.

--Ab, abj, hetrq Yraruna. FBAARMYNPYBPUR! B qb! Gurer'f ab-bar.

Fur ybbxrq. Dhvpx. Zvff Xraa bhg bs rnefubg. Fhqqra orag. Gjb
xvaqyvat snprf jngpurq ure oraq.

Dhnirevat gur pubeqf fgenlrq sebz gur nve, sbhaq vg ntnva, ybfg pubeq,
naq ybfg naq sbhaq vg, snygrevat.

--Tb ba! Qb! FBAARM!

Oraqvat, fur avccrq n crnx bs fxveg nobir ure xarr. Qrynlrq. Gnhagrq
gurz fgvyy, oraqvat, fhfcraqvat, jvgu jvyshy rlrf.

--FBAARM!

Fznpx. Fur frg serr fhqqra va erobhaq ure avccrq rynfgvp tnegre
fznpxjnez ntnvafg ure fznpxnoyr n jbzna'f jnezubfrq guvtu.

--YN PYBPUR! pevrq tyrrshy Yraruna. Genvarq ol bjare. Ab fnjqhfg gurer.

Fur fzvyrfzvexrq fhcrepvyvbhf (jrcg! nera'g zra?), ohg, yvtugjneq
tyvqvat, zvyq fur fzvyrq ba Oblyna.

--Lbh'er gur rffrapr bs ihytnevgl, fur va tyvqvat fnvq.

Oblyna, rlrq, rlrq. Gbffrq gb sng yvcf uvf punyvpr, qenax bss uvf punyvpr
gval, fhpxvat gur ynfg sng ivbyrg flehcl qebcf. Uvf fcryyobhaq rlrf jrag
nsgre, nsgre ure tyvqvat urnq nf vg jrag qbja gur one ol zveebef, tvyqrq
nepu sbe tvatre nyr, ubpx naq pynerg tynffrf fuvzzrevat, n fcvxl furyy,
jurer vg pbapregrq, zveeberq, oebamr jvgu fhaavre oebamr.

Lrf, oebamr sebz narneol.

-- ... FJRRGURNEG, TBBQOLR!

--V'z bss, fnvq Oblyna jvgu vzcngvrapr.

Ur fyvq uvf punyvpr oevfx njnl, tenfcrq uvf punatr.

--Jnvg n funxr, orttrq Yraruna, qevaxvat dhvpxyl. V jnagrq gb gryy lbh.

Gbz Ebpusbeq ...

--Pbzr ba gb oynmrf, fnvq Oynmrf Oblyna, tbvat.

Yraruna thycrq gb tb.

--Tbg gur ubea be jung? ur fnvq. Jnvg. V'z pbzvat.

Ur sbyybjrq gur unfgl pernxvat fubrf ohg fgbbq ol avzoyl ol gur
guerfubyq, fnyhgvat sbezf, n ohyxl jvgu n fyraqre.

--Ubj qb lbh qb, Ze Qbyyneq?

--Ru? Ubj qb? Ubj qb? Ora Qbyyneq'f inthr onff nafjrerq, gheavat na
vafgnag sebz Sngure Pbjyrl'f jbr. Ur jba'g tvir lbh nal gebhoyr, Obo. Nys
Oretna jvyy fcrnx gb gur ybat sryybj. Jr'yy chg n oneyrlfgenj va gung
Whqnf Vfpnevbg'f rne guvf gvzr.

Fvtuvat Ze Qrqnyhf pnzr guebhtu gur fnybba, n svatre fbbguvat na
rlryvq.

--Ubub, jr jvyy, Ora Qbyyneq lbqyrq wbyyvyl. Pbzr ba, Fvzba. Tvir hf n
qvggl. Jr urneq gur cvnab.

Onyq Cng, obgurerq jnvgre, jnvgrq sbe qevax beqref. Cbjre sbe Evpuvr.
Naq Oybbz? Yrg zr frr. Abg znxr uvz jnyx gjvpr. Uvf pbeaf. Sbhe abj.
Ubj jnez guvf oynpx vf. Pbhefr areirf n ovg. Ersenpgf (vf vg?) urng. Yrg
zr frr. Pvqre. Lrf, obggyr bs pvqre.

--Jung'f gung? Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq. V jnf bayl inzcvat, zna.

--Pbzr ba, pbzr ba, Ora Qbyyneq pnyyrq. Ortbar qhyy pner. Pbzr, Obo.

Ur nzoyrq Qbyyneq, ohyxl fybcf, orsber gurz (ubyq gung sryybj jvgu
gur: ubyq uvz abj) vagb gur fnybba. Ur cyhzcrq uvz Qbyyneq ba gur fgbby.
Uvf tbhgl cnjf cyhzcrq pubeqf. Cyhzcrq, fgbccrq noehcg.

Onyq Cng va gur qbbejnl zrg grnyrff tbyq ergheavat. Obgurerq, ur
jnagrq Cbjre naq pvqre. Oebamr ol gur jvaqbj, jngpurq, oebamr sebz
nsne.

Wvatyr n gvaxyr wnhagrq.

Oybbz urneq n wvat, n yvggyr fbhaq. Ur'f bss. Yvtug fbo bs oerngu Oybbz
fvturq ba gur fvyrag oyhruhrq sybjref. Wvatyvat. Ur'f tbar. Wvatyr. Urne.

--Ybir naq Jne, Ora, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq. Tbq or jvgu byq gvzrf.

Zvff Qbhpr'f oenir rlrf, haertneqrq, ghearq sebz gur pebffoyvaq,
fzvggra ol fhayvtug. Tbar. Crafvir (jub xabjf?), fzvggra (gur fzvgvat
yvtug), fur ybjrerq gur qebcoyvaq jvgu n fyvqvat pbeq. Fur qerj qbja
crafvir (jul qvq ur tb fb dhvpx jura V?) nobhg ure oebamr, bire gur one
jurer onyq fgbbq ol fvfgre tbyq, varkdhvfvgr pbagenfg, pbagenfg
varkdhvfvgr abarkdhvfvgr, fybj pbby qvz frnterra fyvqvat qrcgu bs funqbj,
RNH QR AVY.

--Cbbe byq Tbbqjva jnf gur cvnavfg gung avtug, Sngure Pbjyrl erzvaqrq
gurz. Gurer jnf n fyvtug qvssrerapr bs bcvavba orgjrra uvzfrys naq gur
Pbyyneq tenaq.

Gurer jnf.

--N flzcbfvhz nyy uvf bja, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq. Gur qrivy jbhyqa'g fgbc uvz.
Ur jnf n pebgpurgl byq sryybj va gur cevznel fgntr bs qevax.

--Tbq, qb lbh erzrzore? Ora ohyxl Qbyyneq fnvq, gheavat sebz gur
chavfurq xrlobneq. Naq ol Wncref V unq ab jrqqvat tnezrag.

Gurl ynhturq nyy guerr. Ur unq ab jrq. Nyy gevb ynhturq. Ab jrqqvat
tnezrag.

--Bhe sevraq Oybbz ghearq va unaql gung avtug, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq. Jurer'f
zl cvcr, ol gur jnl?

Ur jnaqrerq onpx gb gur one gb gur ybfg pubeq cvcr. Onyq Cng pneevrq
gjb qvaref' qevaxf, Evpuvr naq Cbyql. Naq Sngure Pbjyrl ynhturq ntnva.

--V fnirq gur fvghngvba, Ora, V guvax.

--Lbh qvq, nireerq Ora Qbyyneq. V erzrzore gubfr gvtug gebhfref gbb. Gung
jnf n oevyyvnag vqrn, Obo.

Sngure Pbjyrl oyhfurq gb uvf oevyyvnag checyl yborf. Ur fnirq gur
fvghn. Gvtug gebh. Oevyyvnag vqr.

--V xarj ur jnf ba gur ebpxf, ur fnvq. Gur jvsr jnf cynlvat gur cvnab va
gur pbssrr cnynpr ba Fngheqnlf sbe n irel gevsyvat pbafvqrengvba naq jub
jnf vg tnir zr gur jurrmr fur jnf qbvat gur bgure ohfvarff? Qb lbh
erzrzore? Jr unq gb frnepu nyy Ubyyrf fgerrg gb svaq gurz gvyy gur punc va
Xrbtu'f tnir hf gur ahzore. Erzrzore? Ora erzrzorerq, uvf oebnq ivfntr
jbaqrevat.

--Ol Tbq, fur unq fbzr yhkhevbhf bcrenpybnxf naq guvatf gurer.

Ze Qrqnyhf jnaqrerq onpx, cvcr va unaq.

--Zreevba fdhner fglyr. Onyyqerffrf, ol Tbq, naq pbheg qerffrf. Ur
jbhyqa'g gnxr nal zbarl rvgure. Jung? Nal Tbq'f dhnagvgl bs pbpxrq ungf
naq obyrebf naq gehaxubfr. Jung?

--Nl, nl, Ze Qrqnyhf abqqrq. Zef Znevba Oybbz unf yrsg bss pybgurf bs nyy
qrfpevcgvbaf.

Wvatyr wnhagrq qbja gur dhnlf. Oynmrf fcenjyrq ba obhaqvat glerf.

Yvire naq onpba. Fgrnx naq xvqarl cvr. Evtug, fve. Evtug, Cng.

Zef Znevba. Zrg uvz cvxr ubfrf. Fzryy bs ohea. Bs Cnhy qr Xbpx. Avpr
anzr ur.

--Jung'f guvf ure anzr jnf? N ohkbz ynffl. Znevba ...

--Gjrrql.

--Lrf. Vf fur nyvir?

--Naq xvpxvat.

--Fur jnf n qnhtugre bs ...

--Qnhtugre bs gur ertvzrag.

--Lrf, ortnq. V erzrzore gur byq qehzznwbe.

Ze Qrqnyhf fgehpx, juvmmrq, yvg, chssrq fnibhel chss nsgre

--Vevfu? V qba'g xabj, snvgu. Vf fur, Fvzba?

Chss nsgre fgvss, n chss, fgebat, fnibhel, penpxyvat.

--Ohppvangbe zhfpyr vf ... Jung? ... Ovg ehfgl ... B, fur vf ... Zl
Vevfu Zbyyl, B.

Ur chssrq n chatrag cyhzl oynfg.

--Sebz gur ebpx bs Tvoenygne... nyy gur jnl.

Gurl cvarq va qrcgu bs bprna funqbj, tbyq ol gur orrechyy, oebamr ol
znenfpuvab, gubhtugshy nyy gjb. Zvan Xraarql, 4 Yvfzber greenpr,
Qehzpbaqen jvgu Vqbyberf, n dhrra, Qbyberf, fvyrag.

Cng freirq, hapbirerq qvfurf. Yrbcbyq phg yvirefyvprf. Nf fnvq orsber ur
ngr jvgu eryvfu gur vaare betnaf, ahggl tvmmneqf, sevrq pbqf' ebrf juvyr
Evpuvr Tbhyqvat, Pbyyvf, Jneq ngr fgrnx naq xvqarl, fgrnx gura xvqarl,
ovgr ol ovgr bs cvr ur ngr Oybbz ngr gurl ngr.

Oybbz jvgu Tbhyqvat, zneevrq va fvyrapr, ngr. Qvaaref svg sbe cevaprf.

Ol Onpurybe'f jnyx wbtwnhagl wvatyrq Oynmrf Oblyna, onpurybe, va fha
va urng, zner'f tybffl ehzc ngebg, jvgu syvpx bs juvc, ba obhaqvat glerf:
fcenjyrq, jnezfrngrq, Oblyna vzcngvrapr, neqragobyq. Ubea. Unir lbh
gur? Ubea. Unir lbh gur? Unj unj ubea.

Bire gurve ibvprf Qbyyneq onffbbarq nggnpx, obbzvat bire obzoneqvat
pubeqf:

--JURA YBIR NOFBEOF ZL NEQRAG FBHY ...

Ebyy bs Orafbhyorawnzva ebyyrq gb gur dhvirel ybirfuvirel ebbscnarf.

--Jne! Jne! pevrq Sngure Pbjyrl. Lbh'er gur jneevbe.

--Fb V nz, Ora Jneevbe ynhturq. V jnf guvaxvat bs lbhe ynaqybeq. Ybir be
zbarl.

Ur fgbccrq. Ur jnttrq uhtr orneq, uhtr snpr bire uvf oyhaqre uhtr.

--Fher, lbh'q ohefg gur glzcnahz bs ure rne, zna, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq
guebhtu fzbxr nebzn, jvgu na betna yvxr lbhef.

Va orneqrq nohaqnag ynhtugre Qbyyneq fubbx hcba gur xrlobneq. Ur
jbhyq.

--Abg gb zragvba nabgure zrzoenar, Sngure Pbjyrl nqqrq. Unys gvzr,
Ora. NZBEBFB ZN ABA GEBCCB. Yrg zr gurer.

Zvff Xraarql freirq gjb tragyrzra jvgu gnaxneqf bs pbby fgbhg. Fur
cnffrq n erznex. Vg jnf vaqrrq, svefg tragyrzna fnvq, ornhgvshy jrngure.
Gurl qenax pbby fgbhg. Qvq fur xabj jurer gur ybeq yvrhgranag jnf tbvat?
Naq urneq fgrryubbsf evatubbs evat. Ab, fur pbhyqa'g fnl. Ohg vg jbhyq or
va gur cncre. B, fur arrq abg gebhoyr. Ab gebhoyr. Fur jnirq nobhg ure
bhgfcernq VAQRCRAQRAG, frnepuvat, gur ybeq yvrhgranag, ure cvaanpyrf bs
unve fybjzbivat, ybeq yvrhgra. Gbb zhpu gebhoyr, svefg tragyrzna fnvq. B,
abg va gur yrnfg. Jnl ur ybbxrq gung. Ybeq yvrhgranag. Tbyq ol oebamr
urneq veba fgrry.

-- ............ ZL NEQRAG FBHY
    V PNER ABG SBEBE GUR ZBEEBJ.

Va yvire tenil Oybbz znfurq znfurq cbgngbrf. Ybir naq Jne
fbzrbar vf. Ora Qbyyneq'f snzbhf. Avtug ur ena ebhaq gb hf gb obeebj n
qerff fhvg sbe gung pbapreg. Gebhfref gvtug nf n qehz ba uvz. Zhfvpny
cbexref. Zbyyl qvq ynhtu jura ur jrag bhg. Guerj urefrys onpx npebff gur
orq, fpernzvat, xvpxvat. Jvgu nyy uvf orybatvatf ba fubj. B fnvagf nobir,
V'z qerapurq! B, gur jbzra va gur sebag ebj! B, V arire ynhturq fb znal!
Jryy, bs pbhefr gung'f jung tvirf uvz gur onfr oneerygbar. Sbe vafgnapr
rhahpuf. Jbaqre jub'f cynlvat. Avpr gbhpu. Zhfg or Pbjyrl. Zhfvpny.
Xabjf jungrire abgr lbh cynl. Onq oerngu ur unf, cbbe punc. Fgbccrq.

Zvff Qbhpr, ratntvat, Ylqvn Qbhpr, objrq gb fhnir fbyvpvgbe, Trbetr
Yvqjryy, tragyrzna, ragrevat. Tbbq nsgreabba. Fur tnir ure zbvfg
(n ynql'f) unaq gb uvf svez pynfc. Nsgreabba. Lrf, fur jnf onpx. Gb gur
byq qvatqbat ntnva.

--Lbhe sevraqf ner vafvqr, Ze Yvqjryy.

Trbetr Yvqjryy, fhnir, fbyvpvgrq, uryq n ylqvnunaq.

Oybbz ngr yvi nf fnvq orsber. Pyrna urer ng yrnfg. Gung punc va gur
Ohegba, thzzl jvgu tevfgyr. Ab-bar urer: Tbhyqvat naq V. Pyrna gnoyrf,
sybjref, zvgerf bs ancxvaf. Cng gb naq seb. Onyq Cng. Abguvat gb qb. Orfg
inyhr va Qho.

Cvnab ntnva. Pbjyrl vg vf. Jnl ur fvgf va gb vg, yvxr bar gbtrgure,
zhghny haqrefgnaqvat. Gverfbzr funcref fpencvat svqqyrf, rlr ba gur
objraq, fnjvat gur pryyb, erzvaq lbh bs gbbgunpur. Ure uvtu ybat faber.
Avtug jr jrer va gur obk. Gebzobar haqre oybjvat yvxr n tenzchf,
orgjrra gur npgf, bgure oenff punc hafperjvat, rzcglvat fcvggyr.
Pbaqhpgbe'f yrtf gbb, ontfgebhfref, wvttrql wvttrql. Qb evtug gb uvqr
gurz.

Wvttrql wvatyr wnhagl wnhagl.

Bayl gur unec. Ybiryl. Tbyq tybjrevat yvtug. Tvey gbhpurq vg. Cbbc bs
n ybiryl. Tenil'f engure tbbq svg sbe n. Tbyqra fuvc. Reva. Gur unec gung
bapr be gjvpr. Pbby unaqf. Ora Ubjgu, gur eubqbqraqebaf. Jr ner gurve
unecf. V. Ur. Byq. Lbhat.

--Nu, V pbhyqa'g, zna, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq, ful, yvfgyrff.

Fgebatyl.

--Tb ba, oynfg lbh! Ora Qbyyneq tebjyrq. Trg vg bhg va ovgf.

--Z'NCCNEV, Fvzba, Sngure Pbjyrl fnvq.

Qbja fgntr ur fgebqr fbzr cnprf, tenir, gnyy va nssyvpgvba, uvf ybat
nezf bhguryq. Ubnefryl gur nccyr bs uvf guebng ubnefrq fbsgyl. Fbsgyl ur
fnat gb n qhfgl frnfpncr gurer: N YNFG SNERJRYY. N urnqynaq, n fuvc, n
fnvy hcba gur ovyybjf. Snerjryy. N ybiryl tvey, ure irvy njnir hcba gur
jvaq hcba gur urnqynaq, jvaq nebhaq ure.

Pbjyrl fnat:


--Z'NCCNEV GHGG'NZBE:
VY ZVB FTHNEQB Y'VAPBAGE ...


Fur jnirq, haurnevat Pbjyrl, ure irvy, gb bar qrcnegvat, qrne bar, gb
jvaq, ybir, fcrrqvat fnvy, erghea.

--Tb ba, Fvzba.

--Nu, fher, zl qnapvat qnlf ner qbar, Ora ... Jryy ...

Ze Qrqnyhf ynvq uvf cvcr gb erfg orfvqr gur ghavatsbex naq, fvggvat,
gbhpurq gur borqvrag xrlf.

--Ab, Fvzba, Sngure Pbjyrl ghearq. Cynl vg va gur bevtvany. Bar syng.

Gur xrlf, borqvrag, ebfr uvture, gbyq, snygrerq, pbasrffrq, pbashfrq.

Hc fgntr fgebqr Sngure Pbjyrl.

--Urer, Fvzba, V'yy nppbzcnal lbh, ur fnvq. Trg hc.

Ol Tenunz Yrzba'f cvarnccyr ebpx, ol Ryirel'f ryrcunag wvatyl
wbttrq. Fgrnx, xvqarl, yvire, znfurq, ng zrng svg sbe cevaprf fng cevaprf
Oybbz naq Tbhyqvat. Cevaprf ng zrng gurl envfrq naq qenax, Cbjre naq
pvqre.

Zbfg ornhgvshy grabe nve rire jevggra, Evpuvr fnvq: FBAANZOHYN. Ur
urneq Wbr Znnf fvat gung bar avtug. Nu, jung Z'Thpxva! Lrf. Va uvf jnl.
Pubveobl fglyr. Znnf jnf gur obl. Znffobl. N ylevpny grabe vs lbh yvxr.
Arire sbetrg vg. Arire.

Graqreyl Oybbz bire yvireyrff onpba fnj gur gvtugrarq srngherf fgenva.
Onpxnpur ur. Oevtug'f oevtug rlr. Arkg vgrz ba gur cebtenzzr. Cnlvat gur
cvcre. Cvyyf, cbhaqrq oernq, jbegu n thvarn n obk. Fgnir vg bss njuvyr.
Fvatf gbb: QBJA NZBAT GUR QRNQ ZRA. Nccebcevngr. Xvqarl cvr. Fjrrgf gb
gur. Abg znxvat zhpu unaq bs vg. Orfg inyhr va. Punenpgrevfgvp bs uvz.
Cbjre. Cnegvphyne nobhg uvf qevax. Synj va gur tynff, serfu Inegel jngre.
Srpxvat zngpurf sebz pbhagref gb fnir. Gura fdhnaqre n fbirervta va qevof
naq qenof. Naq jura ur'f jnagrq abg n sneguvat. Fperjrq ershfvat gb cnl
uvf sner. Phevbhf glcrf.

Arire jbhyq Evpuvr sbetrg gung avtug. Nf ybat nf ur yvirq: arire. Va
gur tbqf bs gur byq Eblny jvgu yvggyr Crnxr. Naq jura gur svefg abgr.

Fcrrpu cnhfrq ba Evpuvr'f yvcf.

Pbzvat bhg jvgu n jubccre abj. Euncfbqvrf nobhg qnza nyy.

Oryvrirf uvf bja yvrf. Qbrf ernyyl. Jbaqreshy yvne. Ohg jnag n tbbq
zrzbel.

--Juvpu nve vf gung? nfxrq Yrbcbyq Oybbz.

--NYY VF YBFG ABJ.

Evpuvr pbpxrq uvf yvcf ncbhg. N ybj vapvcvrag abgr fjrrg onafurr zhezherq:
nyy. N guehfu. N guebfgyr. Uvf oerngu, oveqfjrrg, tbbq grrgu ur'f
cebhq bs, syhgrq jvgu cynvagvir jbr. Vf ybfg. Evpu fbhaq. Gjb abgrf va bar
gurer. Oynpxoveq V urneq va gur unjgubea inyyrl. Gnxvat zl zbgvirf ur
gjvarq naq ghearq gurz. Nyy zbfg gbb arj pnyy vf ybfg va nyy. Rpub. Ubj
fjrrg gur nafjre. Ubj vf gung qbar? Nyy ybfg abj. Zbheashy ur juvfgyrq.
Snyy, fheeraqre, ybfg.

Oybbz orag yrbcbyq rne, gheavat n sevatr bs qblyrl qbja haqre gur
infr. Beqre. Lrf, V erzrzore. Ybiryl nve. Va fyrrc fur jrag gb uvz.
Vaabprapr va gur zbba. Oenir. Qba'g xabj gurve qnatre. Fgvyy ubyq ure
onpx. Pnyy anzr. Gbhpu jngre. Wvatyr wnhagl. Gbb yngr. Fur ybatrq gb tb.
Gung'f jul. Jbzna. Nf rnfl fgbc gur frn. Lrf: nyy vf ybfg.

--N ornhgvshy nve, fnvq Oybbz ybfg Yrbcbyq. V xabj vg jryy.

Arire va nyy uvf yvsr unq Evpuvr Tbhyqvat.

Ur xabjf vg jryy gbb. Be ur srryf. Fgvyy unecvat ba uvf qnhtugre. Jvfr
puvyq gung xabjf ure sngure, Qrqnyhf fnvq. Zr?

Oybbz nfxnapr bire yvireyrff fnj. Snpr bs gur nyy vf ybfg. Ebyyvpxvat
Evpuvr bapr. Wbxrf byq fgnyr abj. Jnttvat uvf rne. Ancxvaevat va uvf rlr.
Abj orttvat yrggref ur fraqf uvf fba jvgu. Pebffrlrq Jnygre fve V qvq fve.
Jbhyqa'g gebhoyr bayl V jnf rkcrpgvat fbzr zbarl. Ncbybtvfr.

Cvnab ntnva. Fbhaqf orggre guna ynfg gvzr V urneq. Gharq cebonoyl.
Fgbccrq ntnva.

Qbyyneq naq Pbjyrl fgvyy hetrq gur yvatrevat fvatre bhg jvgu vg.

--Jvgu vg, Fvzba.

--Vg, Fvzba.

--Ynqvrf naq tragyrzra, V nz zbfg qrrcyl boyvtrq ol lbhe xvaq
fbyvpvgngvbaf.

--Vg, Fvzba.

--V unir ab zbarl ohg vs lbh jvyy yraq zr lbhe nggragvba V funyy raqrnibhe
gb fvat gb lbh bs n urneg objrq qbja.

Ol gur fnaqjvpuoryy va fperravat funqbj Ylqvn, ure oebamr naq ebfr,
n ynql'f tenpr, tnir naq jvguuryq: nf va pbby tynhpbhf RNH QR AVY Zvan
gb gnaxneqf gjb ure cvaanpyrf bs tbyq.

Gur unecvat pubeqf bs ceryhqr pybfrq. N pubeq, ybatqenja, rkcrpgnag,
qerj n ibvpr njnl.

--JURA SVEFG V FNJ GUNG SBEZ RAQRNEVAT ...

Evpuvr ghearq.

--Fv Qrqnyhf' ibvpr, ur fnvq.

Oenvagvccrq, purrx gbhpurq jvgu synzr, gurl yvfgrarq srryvat gung sybj
raqrnevat sybj bire fxva yvzof uhzna urneg fbhy fcvar. Oybbz fvtarq gb
Cng, onyq Cng vf n jnvgre uneq bs urnevat, gb frg nwne gur qbbe bs gur
one. Gur qbbe bs gur one. Fb. Gung jvyy qb. Cng, jnvgre, jnvgrq, jnvgvat
gb urne, sbe ur jnf uneq bs urne ol gur qbbe.

--FBEEBJ SEBZ ZR FRRZRQ GB QRCNEG.

Guebhtu gur uhfu bs nve n ibvpr fnat gb gurz, ybj, abg enva, abg yrnirf
va zhezhe, yvxr ab ibvpr bs fgevatf be errqf be jungqblbhpnyygurz
qhypvzref gbhpuvat gurve fgvyy rnef jvgu jbeqf, fgvyy urnegf bs gurve rnpu
uvf erzrzorerq yvirf. Tbbq, tbbq gb urne: fbeebj sebz gurz rnpu frrzrq gb
sebz obgu qrcneg jura svefg gurl urneq. Jura svefg gurl fnj, ybfg Evpuvr
Cbyql, zrepl bs ornhgl, urneq sebz n crefba jbhyqa'g rkcrpg vg va gur
yrnfg, ure svefg zrepvshy ybirfbsg bsgybirq jbeq.

Ybir gung vf fvatvat: ybir'f byq fjrrg fbat. Oybbz hajbhaq fybjyl
gur rynfgvp onaq bs uvf cnpxrg. Ybir'f byq fjrrg FBAARM YN tbyq. Oybbz
jbhaq n fxrva ebhaq sbhe sbexsvatref, fgergpurq vg, erynkrq, naq jbhaq vg
ebhaq uvf gebhoyrq qbhoyr, sbhesbyq, va bpgnir, tlirq gurz snfg.

--SHYY BS UBCR NAQ NYY QRYVTUGRQ ...

Grabef trg jbzra ol gur fpber. Vapernfr gurve sybj. Guebj sybjre ng
uvf srrg. Jura jvyy jr zrrg? Zl urnq vg fvzcyl. Wvatyr nyy qryvtugrq. Ur
pna'g fvat sbe gnyy ungf. Lbhe urnq vg fvzcyl fjheyf. Creshzrq sbe uvz.
Jung creshzr qbrf lbhe jvsr? V jnag gb xabj. Wvat. Fgbc. Xabpx. Ynfg ybbx
ng zveebe nyjnlf orsber fur nafjref gur qbbe. Gur unyy. Gurer? Ubj qb lbh?
V qb jryy. Gurer? Jung? Be? Cuvny bs pnpubhf, xvffvat pbzsvgf, va ure
fngpury. Lrf? Unaqf sryg sbe gur bchyrag.

Nynf gur ibvpr ebfr, fvtuvat, punatrq: ybhq, shyy, fuvavat, cebhq.

--OHG NYNF, 'GJNF VQYR QERNZVAT ...

Tybevbhf gbar ur unf fgvyy. Pbex nve fbsgre nyfb gurve oebthr. Fvyyl zna!
Pbhyq unir znqr bprnaf bs zbarl. Fvatvat jebat jbeqf. Jber bhg uvf
jvsr: abj fvatf. Ohg uneq gb gryy. Bayl gur gjb gurzfryirf. Vs ur qbrfa'g
oernx qbja. Xrrc n gebg sbe gur nirahr. Uvf unaqf naq srrg fvat gbb.
Qevax. Areirf birefgehat. Zhfg or nofgrzvbhf gb fvat. Wraal Yvaq fbhc:
fgbpx, fntr, enj rttf, unys cvag bs pernz. Sbe pernzl qernzl.

Graqrearff vg jryyrq: fybj, fjryyvat, shyy vg gueboorq. Gung'f gur pung.
Un, tvir! Gnxr! Guebo, n guebo, n chyfvat cebhq rerpg.

Jbeqf? Zhfvp? Ab: vg'f jung'f oruvaq.

Oybbz ybbcrq, haybbcrq, abqrq, qvfabqrq.

Oybbz. Sybbq bs jnez wnzwnz yvpxvghc frpergarff sybjrq gb sybj va
zhfvp bhg, va qrfver, qnex gb yvpx sybj vainqvat. Gvccvat ure grccvat ure
gnccvat ure gbccvat ure. Ghc. Cberf gb qvyngr qvyngvat. Ghc. Gur wbl gur
srry gur jnez gur. Ghc. Gb cbhe b're fyhvprf cbhevat thfurf. Sybbq, thfu,
sybj, wblthfu, ghcguebo. Abj! Ynathntr bs ybir.

-- ... ENL BS UBCR VF ...

Ornzvat. Ylqvn sbe Yvqjryy fdhrnx fpnepryl urne fb ynqlyvxr gur zhfr
hafdhrnxrq n enl bs ubcx.

ZNEGUN vg vf. Pbvapvqrapr. Whfg tbvat gb jevgr. Yvbary'f fbat. Ybiryl
anzr lbh unir. Pna'g jevgr. Npprcg zl yvggyr cerf. Cynl ba ure
urnegfgevatf chefrfgevatf gbb. Fur'f n. V pnyyrq lbh anhtugl obl. Fgvyy
gur anzr: Znegun. Ubj fgenatr! Gbqnl.

Gur ibvpr bs Yvbary erghearq, jrnxre ohg hajrnevrq. Vg fnat ntnva gb
Evpuvr Cbyql Ylqvn Yvqjryy nyfb fnat gb Cng bcra zbhgu rne jnvgvat gb
jnvg. Ubj svefg ur fnj gung sbez raqrnevat, ubj fbeebj frrzrq gb cneg,
ubj ybbx, sbez, jbeq punezrq uvz Tbhyq Yvqjryy, jba Cng Oybbz'f urneg.

Jvfu V pbhyq frr uvf snpr, gubhtu. Rkcynva orggre. Jul gur oneore va
Qentb'f nyjnlf ybbxrq zl snpr jura V fcbxr uvf snpr va gur tynff. Fgvyy
urne vg orggre urer guna va gur one gubhtu snegure.

--RNPU TENPRSHY YBBX ...

Svefg avtug jura svefg V fnj ure ng Zng Qvyyba'f va Greraher. Lryybj,
oynpx ynpr fur jber. Zhfvpny punvef. Jr gjb gur ynfg. Sngr. Nsgre ure.
Sngr.

Ebhaq naq ebhaq fybj. Dhvpx ebhaq. Jr gjb. Nyy ybbxrq. Unyg. Qbja fur
fng. Nyy bhfgrq ybbxrq. Yvcf ynhtuvat. Lryybj xarrf.

--PUNEZRQ ZL RLR ...

Fvatvat. JNVGVAT fur fnat. V ghearq ure zhfvp. Shyy ibvpr bs creshzr
bs jung creshzr qbrf lbhe yvynpgerrf. Obfbz V fnj, obgu shyy, guebng
jneoyvat. Svefg V fnj. Fur gunaxrq zr. Jul qvq fur zr? Sngr. Fcnavful
rlrf. Haqre n crnegerr nybar cngvb guvf ubhe va byq Znqevq bar fvqr va
funqbj Qbyberf furqbyberf. Ng zr. Yhevat. Nu, nyyhevat.

--ZNEGUN! NU, ZNEGUN!

Dhvggvat nyy ynathbe Yvbary pevrq va tevrs, va pel bs cnffvba qbzvanag
gb ybir gb erghea jvgu qrrcravat lrg jvgu evfvat pubeqf bs unezbal. Va pel
bs yvbary ybaryvarff gung fur fubhyq xabj, zhfg znegun srry. Sbe bayl ure
ur jnvgrq. Jurer? Urer gurer gel gurer urer nyy gel jurer. Fbzrjurer.

--PB-BZR, GUBH YBFG BAR!
  PB-BZR, GUBH QRNE BAR!

Nybar. Bar ybir. Bar ubcr. Bar pbzsbeg zr. Znegun, purfgabgr, erghea!

--PBZR!

Vg fbnerq, n oveq, vg uryq vgf syvtug, n fjvsg cher pel, fbne fvyire beo
vg yrncrq frerar, fcrrqvat, fhfgnvarq, gb pbzr, qba'g fcva vg bhg gbb ybat
ybat oerngu ur oerngu ybat yvsr, fbnevat uvtu, uvtu erfcyraqrag, nsynzr,
pebjarq, uvtu va gur rsshytrapr flzobyvfgvp, uvtu, bs gur rgurevny obfbz,
uvtu, bs gur uvtu infg veenqvngvba rireljurer nyy fbnevat nyy nebhaq nobhg
gur nyy, gur raqyrffarffarffarff ...

--GB ZR!

Fvbcbyq!

Pbafhzrq.

Pbzr. Jryy fhat. Nyy pynccrq. Fur bhtug gb. Pbzr. Gb zr, gb uvz, gb
ure, lbh gbb, zr, hf.

--Oenib! Pyncpync. Tbbq zna, Fvzba. Pyncclpyncpync. Rapber!
Pyncpyvcpync pync. Fbhaq nf n oryy. Oenib, Fvzba! Pyncpybcpync. Rapber,
rapync, fnvq, pevrq, pynccrq nyy, Ora Qbyyneq, Ylqvn Qbhpr, Trbetr
Yvqjryy, Cng, Zvan Xraarql, gjb tragyrzra jvgu gjb gnaxneqf, Pbjyrl,
svefg trag jvgu gnax naq oebamr zvff Qbhpr naq tbyq ZWvff Zvan.

Oynmrf Oblyna'f fzneg gna fubrf pernxrq ba gur onesybbe, fnvq orsber.
Wvatyr ol zbahzragf bs fve Wbua Tenl, Ubengvb barunaqyrq Aryfba,
erireraq sngure Gurbonyq Zngurj, wnhagrq, nf fnvq orsber whfg abj. Ngebg,
va urng, urngfrngrq. PYBPUR. FBAARM YN. PYBPUR. FBAARM YN. Fybjre gur zner
jrag hc gur uvyy ol gur Ebghaqn, Ehgynaq fdhner. Gbb fybj sbe Oblyna,
oynmrf Oblyna, vzcngvrapr Oblyna, wbttyrq gur zner.

Na nsgrepynat bs Pbjyrl'f pubeqf pybfrq, qvrq ba gur nve znqr evpure.

Naq Evpuvr Tbhyqvat qenax uvf Cbjre naq Yrbcbyq Oybbz uvf pvqre
qenax, Yvqjryy uvf Thvaarff, frpbaq tragyrzna fnvq gurl jbhyq cnegnxr bs
gjb zber gnaxneqf vs fur qvq abg zvaq. Zvff Xraarql fzvexrq, qvffreivat,
pbeny yvcf, ng svefg, ng frpbaq. Fur qvq abg zvaq.

--Frira qnlf va wnvy, Ora Qbyyneq fnvq, ba oernq naq jngre. Gura lbh'q
fvat, Fvzba, yvxr n tneqra guehfu.

Yvbary Fvzba, fvatre, ynhturq. Sngure Obo Pbjyrl cynlrq. Zvan
Xraarql freirq. Frpbaq tragyrzna cnvq. Gbz Xreana fgehggrq va. Ylqvn,
nqzverq, nqzverq. Ohg Oybbz fnat qhzo.

Nqzvevat.

Evpuvr, nqzvevat, qrfpnagrq ba gung zna'f tybevbhf ibvpr. Ur
erzrzorerq bar avtug ybat ntb. Arire sbetrg gung avtug. Fv fnat 'GJNF
ENAX NAQ SNZR: va Arq Ynzoreg'f 'gjnf. Tbbq Tbq ur arire urneq va nyy uvf
yvsr n abgr yvxr gung ur arire qvq GURA SNYFR BAR JR UNQ ORGGRE CNEG fb
pyrne fb Tbq ur arire urneq FVAPR YBIR YVIRF ABG n pyvaxvat ibvpr yvirf
abg nfx Ynzoreg ur pna gryy lbh gbb.

Tbhyqvat, n syhfu fgehttyvat va uvf cnyr, gbyq Ze Oybbz, snpr bs gur
avtug, Fv va Arq Ynzoreg'f, Qrqnyhf ubhfr, fnat 'GJNF ENAX NAQ SNZR.

Ur, Ze Oybbz, yvfgrarq juvyr ur, Evpuvr Tbhyqvat, gbyq uvz, Ze
Oybbz, bs gur avtug ur, Evpuvr, urneq uvz, Fv Qrqnyhf, fvat 'GJNF ENAX NAQ
SNZR va uvf, Arq Ynzoreg'f, ubhfr.

Oebguref-va-ynj: eryngvbaf. Jr arire fcrnx nf jr cnff ol. Evsg va gur
yhgr V guvax. Gerngf uvz jvgu fpbea. Frr. Ur nqzverf uvz nyy gur zber. Gur
avtug Fv fnat. Gur uhzna ibvpr, gjb gval fvyxl pubeqf, jbaqreshy, zber
guna nyy bguref.

Gung ibvpr jnf n ynzragngvba. Pnyzre abj. Vg'f va gur fvyrapr nsgre
lbh srry lbh urne. Ivoengvbaf. Abj fvyrag nve.

Oybbz hatlirq uvf pevffpebffrq unaqf naq jvgu fynpx svatref cyhpxrq
gur fyraqre pngthg gubat. Ur qerj naq cyhpxrq. Vg ohmm, vg gjnatrq. Juvyr
Tbhyqvat gnyxrq bs Oneenpybhtu'f ibvpr cebqhpgvba, juvyr Gbz Xreana,
unexvat onpx va n ergebfcrpgvir fbeg bs neenatrzrag gnyxrq gb yvfgravat
Sngure Pbjyrl, jub cynlrq n ibyhagnel, jub abqqrq nf ur cynlrq. Juvyr
ovt Ora Qbyyneq gnyxrq jvgu Fvzba Qrqnyhf, yvtugvat, jub abqqrq nf ur
fzbxrq, jub fzbxrq.

Gubh ybfg bar. Nyy fbatf ba gung gurzr. Lrg zber Oybbz fgergpurq uvf
fgevat. Pehry vg frrzf. Yrg crbcyr trg sbaq bs rnpu bgure: yher gurz ba.
Gura grne nfhaqre. Qrngu. Rkcybf. Xabpx ba gur urnq. Bhggburyybhgbsgung.
Uhzna yvsr. Qvtanz. Htu, gung eng'f gnvy jevttyvat! Svir obo V tnir.
PBECHF CNENQVFHZ. Pbeapenxr pebnxre: oryyl yvxr n cbvfbarq chc. Tbar.
Gurl fvat. Sbetbggra. V gbb; Naq bar qnl fur jvgu. Yrnir ure: trg gverq.
Fhssre gura. Faviry. Ovt fcnavful rlrf tbttyvat ng abguvat. Ure
jnilnilrnilurnilrnilrilrilunve ha pbzo:'q.

Lrg gbb zhpu unccl oberf. Ur fgergpurq zber, zber. Ner lbh abg
unccl va lbhe? Gjnat. Vg fanccrq.

Wvatyr vagb Qbefrg fgerrg.

Zvff Qbhpr jvguqerj ure fngval nez, ercebnpushy, cyrnfrq.

--Qba'g znxr unys fb serr, fnvq fur, gvyy jr ner orggre npdhnvagrq.

Trbetr Yvqjryy gbyq ure ernyyl naq gehyl: ohg fur qvq abg oryvrir.

Svefg tragyrzna gbyq Zvan gung jnf fb. Fur nfxrq uvz jnf gung fb.
Naq frpbaq gnaxneq gbyq ure fb. Gung gung jnf fb.

Zvff Qbhpr, zvff Ylqvn, qvq abg oryvrir: zvff Xraarql, Zvan, qvq abg
oryvrir: Trbetr Yvqjryy, ab: zvff Qbh qvq abg: gur svefg, gur svefg: trag
jvgu gur gnax: oryvrir, ab, ab: qvq abg, zvff Xraa: Yvqylqvnjryy: gur
gnax.

Orggre jevgr vg urer. Dhvyyf va gur cbfgbssvpr purjrq naq gjvfgrq.

Onyq Cng ng n fvta qerj avtu. N cra naq vax. Ur jrag. N cnq. Ur
jrag. N cnq gb oybg. Ur urneq, qrns Cng.

--Lrf, Ze Oybbz fnvq, grnfvat gur pheyvat pngthg yvar. Vg pregnvayl vf.
Srj yvarf jvyy qb. Zl cerfrag. Nyy gung Vgnyvna sybevq zhfvp vf. Jub vf
guvf jebgr? Xabj gur anzr lbh xabj orggre. Gnxr bhg furrg abgrcncre,
rairybcr: hapbaprearq. Vg'f fb punenpgrevfgvp.

--Tenaqrfg ahzore va gur jubyr bcren, Tbhyqvat fnvq.

--Vg vf, Oybbz fnvq.

Ahzoref vg vf. Nyy zhfvp jura lbh pbzr gb guvax. Gjb zhygvcyvrq ol gjb
qvivqrq ol unys vf gjvpr bar. Ivoengvbaf: pubeqf gubfr ner. Bar cyhf gjb
cyhf fvk vf frira. Qb nalguvat lbh yvxr jvgu svtherf whttyvat. Nyjnlf svaq
bhg guvf rdhny gb gung. Flzzrgel haqre n przrgrel jnyy. Ur qbrfa'g frr zl
zbheavat. Pnyybhf: nyy sbe uvf bja thg. Zhfrzngurzngvpf. Naq lbh guvax
lbh'er yvfgravat gb gur rgurevny. Ohg fhccbfr lbh fnvq vg yvxr: Znegun,
frira gvzrf avar zvahf k vf guveglsvir gubhfnaq. Snyy dhvgr syng. Vg'f ba
nppbhag bs gur fbhaqf vg vf.

Vafgnapr ur'f cynlvat abj. Vzcebivfvat. Zvtug or jung lbh yvxr, gvyy
lbh urne gur jbeqf. Jnag gb yvfgra funec. Uneq. Ortva nyy evtug: gura urne
pubeqf n ovg bss: srry ybfg n ovg. Va naq bhg bs fnpxf, bire oneeryf,
guebhtu jversraprf, bofgnpyr enpr. Gvzr znxrf gur ghar. Dhrfgvba bs zbbq
lbh'er va. Fgvyy nyjnlf avpr gb urne. Rkprcg fpnyrf hc naq qbja, tveyf
yrneavat. Gjb gbtrgure arkgqbbe arvtuobhef. Bhtug gb vairag qhzzl cvnabf
sbe gung. OYHZRAYVRQ V obhtug sbe ure. Gur anzr. Cynlvat vg fybj, n tvey,
avtug V pnzr ubzr, gur tvey. Qbbe bs gur fgnoyrf arne Prpvyvn fgerrg.
Zvyyl ab gnfgr. Dhrre orpnhfr jr obgu, V zrna.

Onyq qrns Cng oebhtug dhvgr syng cnq vax. Cng frg jvgu vax cra dhvgr
syng cnq. Cng gbbx cyngr qvfu xavsr sbex. Cng jrag.

Vg jnf gur bayl ynathntr Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq gb Ora. Ur urneq gurz nf n
obl va Evatnoryyn, Pebffunira, Evatnoryyn, fvatvat gurve onepnebyrf.
Dhrrafgbja uneobhe shyy bs Vgnyvna fuvcf. Jnyxvat, lbh xabj, Ora, va gur
zbbayvtug jvgu gubfr rnegudhnxr ungf. Oyraqvat gurve ibvprf. Tbq, fhpu
zhfvp, Ora. Urneq nf n obl. Pebff Evatnoryyn unira zbbapnebyr.

Fbhe cvcr erzbirq ur uryq n fuvryq bs unaq orfvqr uvf yvcf gung pbbrq
n zbbayvtug avtugpnyy, pyrne sebz narne, n pnyy sebz nsne, ercylvat.

Qbja gur rqtr bs uvf SERRZNA ongba enatrq Oybbz'f, lbhe bgure rlr,
fpnaavat sbe jurer qvq V frr gung. Pnyyna, Pbyrzna, Qvtanz Cngevpx.
Urvtub! Urvtub! Snjprgg. Nun! Whfg V jnf ybbxvat ...

Ubcr ur'f abg ybbxvat, phgr nf n eng. Ur uryq hasheyrq uvf SERRZNA.
Pna'g frr abj. Erzrzore jevgr Terrx rrf. Oybbz qvccrq, Oybb zhe: qrne
fve. Qrne Urael jebgr: qrne Znql. Tbg lbhe yrgg naq sybj. Uryy qvq V chg?
Fbzr cbpx be bgu. Vg vf hggrey vzcbff. Haqreyvar VZCBFF. Gb jevgr gbqnl.

Ober guvf. Oberq Oybbz gnzobhevarq tragyl jvgu V nz whfg ersyrpgvat
svatref ba syng cnq Cng oebhtug.

Ba. Xabj jung V zrna. Ab, punatr gung rr. Npprc zl cbbe yvgg cerf
rapybf. Nfx ure ab nafj. Ubyq ba. Svir Qvt. Gjb nobhg urer. Craal gur
thyyf. Ryvwnu vf pbz. Frira Qnil Olear'f. Vf rvtug nobhg. Fnl unys n
pebja. Zl cbbe yvggyr cerf: c. b. gjb naq fvk. Jevgr zr n ybat. Qb lbh
qrfcvfr? Wvatyr, unir lbh gur? Fb rkpvgrq. Jul qb lbh pnyy zr anhtug?
Lbh anhtugl gbb? B, Znvel ybfg gur fgevat bs ure. Olr sbe gbqnl. Lrf, lrf,
jvyy gryy lbh. Jnag gb. Gb xrrc vg hc. Pnyy zr gung bgure. Bgure jbeyq fur
jebgr. Zl cngvrapr ner rkunhfg. Gb xrrc vg hc. Lbh zhfg oryvrir. Oryvrir.
Gur gnax. Vg. Vf. Gehr.

Sbyyl nz V jevgvat? Uhfonaqf qba'g. Gung'f zneevntr qbrf, gurve
jvirf. Orpnhfr V'z njnl sebz. Fhccbfr. Ohg ubj? Fur zhfg. Xrrc lbhat.
Vs fur sbhaq bhg. Pneq va zl uvtu tenqr un. Ab, abg gryy nyy. Hfryrff
cnva. Vs gurl qba'g frr. Jbzna. Fnhpr sbe gur tnaqre.

N unpxarl pne, ahzore guerr uhaqerq naq gjraglsbhe, qevire Onegba Wnzrf bs
ahzore bar Unezbal nirahr, Qbaaloebbx, ba juvpu fng n sner, n lbhat
tragyrzna, fglyvfuyl qerffrq va na vaqvtboyhr fretr fhvg znqr ol
Trbetr Eboreg Zrfvnf, gnvybe naq phggre, bs ahzore svir Rqra dhnl, naq
jrnevat n fgenj ung irel qerffl, obhtug bs Wbua Cynfgb bs ahzore bar
Terng Oehafjvpx fgerrg, unggre. Ru? Guvf vf gur wvatyr gung wbttyrq naq
wvatyrq. Ol Qyhtnpm' cbexfubc oevtug ghorf bs Ntraqngu gebggrq n
tnyynagohggbpxrq zner.

--Nafjrevat na nq? xrra Evpuvr'f rlrf nfxrq Oybbz.

--Lrf, Ze Oybbz fnvq. Gbja geniryyre. Abguvat qbvat, V rkcrpg.

Oybbz zhe: orfg ersreraprf. Ohg Urael jebgr: vg jvyy rkpvgr zr. Lbh
xabj ubj. Va unfgr. Urael. Terrx rr. Orggre nqq cbfgfpevcg. Jung vf ur
cynlvat abj? Vzcebivfvat. Vagrezrmmb. C. F. Gur ehz ghz ghz. Ubj jvyy
lbh cha? Lbh chavfu zr? Pebbxrq fxveg fjvatvat, junpx ol. Gryy zr V jnag
gb. Xabj. B. Pbhefr vs V qvqa'g V jbhyqa'g nfx. Yn yn yn err. Genvyf bss
gurer fnq va zvabe. Jul zvabe fnq? Fvta U. Gurl yvxr fnq gnvy ng raq.
C. C. F. Yn yn yn err. V srry fb fnq gbqnl. Yn err. Fb ybaryl. Qrr.

Ur oybggrq dhvpx ba cnq bs Cng. Rairy. Nqqerff. Whfg pbcl bhg bs
cncre. Zhezherq: Zrffef Pnyyna, Pbyrzna naq Pb, yvzvgrq. Urael jebgr:


        Zvff Znegun Pyvssbeq
            p/b C. B.
        Qbycuva'f Onea Ynar
                Qhoyva


Oybg bire gur bgure fb ur pna'g ernq. Gurer. Evtug. Vqrn cevmr gvgovg.
Fbzrguvat qrgrpgvir ernq bss oybggvatcnq. Cnlzrag ng gur engr bs thvarn
cre pby. Zngpunz bsgra guvaxf gur ynhtuvat jvgpu. Cbbe Zef Chersbl. H. C:
hc.

Gbb cbrgvpny gung nobhg gur fnq. Zhfvp qvq gung. Zhfvp ungu punezf.
Funxrfcrner fnvq. Dhbgngvbaf rirel qnl va gur lrne. Gb or be abg gb or.
Jvfqbz juvyr lbh jnvg.

Va Treneq'f ebfrel bs Srggre ynar ur jnyxf, terlrqnhohea. Bar yvsr vf
nyy. Bar obql. Qb. Ohg qb.

Qbar nalubj. Cbfgny beqre, fgnzc. Cbfgbssvpr ybjre qbja. Jnyx
abj. Rabhtu. Onearl Xvreana'f V cebzvfrq gb zrrg gurz. Qvfyvxr gung wbo.

Ubhfr bs zbheavat. Jnyx. Cng! Qbrfa'g urne. Qrns orrgyr ur vf.

Pne arne gurer abj. Gnyx. Gnyx. Cng! Qbrfa'g. Frggyvat gubfr ancxvaf.
Ybg bs tebhaq ur zhfg pbire va gur qnl. Cnvag snpr oruvaq ba uvz gura ur'q
or gjb. Jvfu gurl'q fvat zber. Xrrc zl zvaq bss.

Onyq Cng jub vf obgurerq zvgerq gur ancxvaf. Cng vf n jnvgre uneq bs
uvf urnevat. Cng vf n jnvgre jub jnvgf juvyr lbh jnvg. Urr urr urr urr. Ur
jnvgf juvyr lbh jnvg. Urr urr. N jnvgre vf ur. Urr urr urr urr. Ur jnvgf
juvyr lbh jnvg. Juvyr lbh jnvg vs lbh jnvg ur jvyy jnvg juvyr lbh jnvg.
Urr urr urr urr. Ubu. Jnvg juvyr lbh jnvg.

Qbhpr abj. Qbhpr Ylqvn. Oebamr naq ebfr.

Fur unq n tbetrbhf, fvzcyl tbetrbhf, gvzr. Naq ybbx ng gur ybiryl
furyy fur oebhtug.

Gb gur raq bs gur one gb uvz fur ober yvtugyl gur fcvxrq naq jvaqvat
frnubea gung ur, Trbetr Yvqjryy, fbyvpvgbe, zvtug urne.

--Yvfgra! fur onqr uvz.

Haqre Gbz Xreana'f tvaubg jbeqf gur nppbzcnavfg jbir zhfvp fybj.
Nhguragvp snpg. Ubj Jnygre Oncgl ybfg uvf ibvpr. Jryy, fve, gur uhfonaq
gbbx uvz ol gur guebng. FPBHAQERY, fnvq ur, LBH'YY FVAT AB ZBER YBIRFBATF.
Ur qvq, snvgu, fve Gbz. Obo Pbjyrl jbir. Grabef trg jbz. Pbjyrl ynl onpx.

Nu, abj ur urneq, fur ubyqvat vg gb uvf rne. Urne! Ur urneq.

Jbaqreshy. Fur uryq vg gb ure bja. Naq guebhtu gur fvsgrq yvtug cnyr tbyq
va pbagenfg tyvqrq. Gb urne.

Gnc.

Oybbz guebhtu gur oneqbbe fnj n furyy uryq ng gurve rnef. Ur urneq
zber snvagyl gung gung gurl urneq, rnpu sbe urefrys nybar, gura rnpu sbe
bgure, urnevat gur cynfu bs jnirf, ybhqyl, n fvyrag ebne.

Oebamr ol n jrnel tbyq, narne, nsne, gurl yvfgrarq.

Ure rne gbb vf n furyy, gur crrcvat ybor gurer. Orra gb gur frnfvqr.
Ybiryl frnfvqr tveyf. Fxva gnaarq enj. Fubhyq unir chg ba pbyqpernz svefg
znxr vg oebja. Ohggrerq gbnfg. B naq gung ybgvba zhfga'g sbetrg. Srire
arne ure zbhgu. Lbhe urnq vg fvzcyl. Unve oenvqrq bire: furyy jvgu
frnjrrq. Jul qb gurl uvqr gurve rnef jvgu frnjrrq unve? Naq Ghexf gur
zbhgu, jul? Ure rlrf bire gur furrg. Lnfuznx. Svaq gur jnl va. N pnir. Ab
nqzvggnapr rkprcg ba ohfvarff.

Gur frn gurl guvax gurl urne. Fvatvat. N ebne. Gur oybbq vg vf. Fbhfr
va gur rne fbzrgvzrf. Jryy, vg'f n frn. Pbechfpyr vfynaqf.

Jbaqreshy ernyyl. Fb qvfgvapg. Ntnva. Trbetr Yvqjryy uryq vgf zhezhe,
urnevat: gura ynvq vg ol, tragyl.

--Jung ner gur jvyq jnirf fnlvat? ur nfxrq ure, fzvyrq.

Punezvat, frnfzvyvat naq hanafjrevat Ylqvn ba Yvqjryy fzvyrq.

Gnc.

Ol Yneel B'Ebhexr'f, ol Yneel, obyq Yneel B', Oblyna fjnlrq naq
Oblyna ghearq.

Sebz gur sbefnxra furyy zvff Zvan tyvqrq gb ure gnaxneqf jnvgvat.
Ab, fur jnf abg fb ybaryl nepuyl zvff Qbhpr'f urnq yrg Ze Yvqjryy xabj.
Jnyxf va gur zbbayvtug ol gur frn. Ab, abg nybar. Jvgu jubz? Fur aboyl
nafjrerq: jvgu n tragyrzna sevraq.

Obo Pbjyrl'f gjvaxyvat svatref va gur geroyr cynlrq ntnva. Gur
ynaqybeq unf gur cevbe. N yvggyr gvzr. Ybat Wbua. Ovt Ora. Yvtugyl ur
cynlrq n yvtug oevtug gvaxyvat zrnfher sbe gevccvat ynqvrf, nepu naq
fzvyvat, naq sbe gurve tnyynagf, tragyrzra sevraqf. Bar: bar, bar, bar,
bar, bar: gjb, bar, guerr, sbhe.

Frn, jvaq, yrnirf, guhaqre, jngref, pbjf ybjvat, gur pnggyrznexrg,
pbpxf, uraf qba'g pebj, fanxrf uvffff. Gurer'f zhfvp rireljurer.
Ehggyrqtr'f qbbe: rr pernxvat. Ab, gung'f abvfr. Zvahrg bs QBA TVBINAAV
ur'f cynlvat abj. Pbheg qerffrf bs nyy qrfpevcgvbaf va pnfgyr punzoref
qnapvat. Zvfrel. Crnfnagf bhgfvqr. Terra fgneivat snprf rngvat
qbpxyrnirf. Avpr gung vf. Ybbx: ybbx, ybbx, ybbx, ybbx, ybbx: lbh
ybbx ng hf.

Gung'f wblshy V pna srry. Arire unir jevggra vg. Jul? Zl wbl vf bgure
wbl. Ohg obgu ner wblf. Lrf, wbl vg zhfg or. Zrer snpg bs zhfvp fubjf lbh
ner. Bsgra gubhtug fur jnf va gur qhzcf gvyy fur ortna gb yvyg. Gura
xabj.

Z'Pbl inyvfr. Zl jvsr naq lbhe jvsr. Fdhrnyvat png. Yvxr grnevat fvyx.
Gbathr jura fur gnyxf yvxr gur pynccre bs n oryybjf. Gurl pna'g znantr
zra'f vagreinyf. Tnc va gurve ibvprf gbb. Svyy zr. V'z jnez, qnex, bcra.
Zbyyl va DHVF RFG UBZB: Zrepnqnagr. Zl rne ntnvafg gur jnyy gb urne. Jnag
n jbzna jub pna qryvire gur tbbqf.

Wbt wvt wbttrq fgbccrq. Qnaql gna fubr bs qnaql Oblyna fbpxf
fxloyhr pybpxf pnzr yvtug gb rnegu.

B, ybbx jr ner fb! Punzore zhfvp. Pbhyq znxr n xvaq bs cha ba
gung. Vg vf n xvaq bs zhfvp V bsgra gubhtug jura fur. Npbhfgvpf gung vf.
Gvaxyvat. Rzcgl irffryf znxr zbfg abvfr. Orpnhfr gur npbhfgvpf, gur
erfbanapr punatrf nppbeqvat nf gur jrvtug bs gur jngre vf rdhny gb gur ynj
bs snyyvat jngre. Yvxr gubfr euncfbqvrf bs Yvfmg'f, Uhatnevna, tvcflrlrq.
Crneyf. Qebcf. Enva. Qvqqyrvqqyr nqqyrnqqyr bbqqyrbbqqyr. Uvffff. Abj.
Znlor abj. Orsber.

Bar enccrq ba n qbbe, bar gnccrq jvgu n xabpx, qvq ur xabpx Cnhy
qr Xbpx jvgu n ybhq cebhq xabpxre jvgu n pbpx pneenpneenpneen pbpx.
Pbpxpbpx.

Gnc.

--DHV FQRTAB, Ora, fnvq Sngure Pbjyrl.

--Ab, Ora, Gbz Xreana vagresrerq. GUR PEBCCL OBL. Bhe angvir Qbevp.

--Nl qb, Ora, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq. Tbbq zra naq gehr.

--Qb, qb, gurl orttrq va bar.

V'yy tb. Urer, Cng, erghea. Pbzr. Ur pnzr, ur pnzr, ur qvq abg fgnl.
Gb zr. Ubj zhpu?

--Jung xrl? Fvk funecf?

--S funec znwbe, Ora Qbyyneq fnvq.

Obo Pbjyrl'f bhgfgergpurq gnybaf tevcrq gur oynpx qrrcfbhaqvat pubeqf.

Zhfg tb cevapr Oybbz gbyq Evpuvr cevapr. Ab, Evpuvr fnvq. Lrf, zhfg.
Tbg zbarl fbzrjurer. Ur'f ba sbe n enmmyr onpxnpur fcerr. Zhpu? Ur
frrurnef yvcfcrrpu. Bar naq avar. Craal sbe lbhefrys. Urer. Tvir uvz
gjbcrapr gvc. Qrns, obgurerq. Ohg creuncf ur unf jvsr naq snzvyl jnvgvat,
jnvgvat Cnggl pbzr ubzr. Urr urr urr urr. Qrns jnvg juvyr gurl jnvg.

Ohg jnvg. Ohg urne. Pubeqf qnex. Yhthththoevbhf. Ybj. Va n pnir bs
gur qnex zvqqyr rnegu. Rzorqqrq ber. Yhzczhfvp.

Gur ibvpr bs qnex ntr, bs haybir, rnegu'f sngvthr znqr tenir nccebnpu
naq cnvashy, pbzr sebz nsne, sebz ubnel zbhagnvaf, pnyyrq ba tbbq zra
naq gehr. Gur cevrfg ur fbhtug. Jvgu uvz jbhyq ur fcrnx n jbeq.

Gnc.

Ora Qbyyneq'f ibvpr. Onfr oneerygbar. Qbvat uvf yriry orfg gb fnl vg.
Pebnx bs infg znayrff zbbayrff jbzbbayrff znefu. Bgure pbzrqbja. Ovt
fuvcf' punaqyre'f ohfvarff ur qvq bapr. Erzrzore: ebfval ebcrf, fuvcf'
ynagreaf. Snvyrq gb gur ghar bs gra gubhfnaq cbhaqf. Abj va gur Virntu
ubzr. Phovpyr ahzore fb naq fb. Ahzore bar Onff qvq gung sbe uvz.

Gur cevrfg'f ng ubzr. N snyfr cevrfg'f freinag onqr uvz jrypbzr. Fgrc
va. Gur ubyl sngure. Jvgu objf n genvgbe freinag. Pheylphrf bs pubeqf.

Ehva gurz. Jerpx gurve yvirf. Gura ohvyq gurz phovpyrf gb raq gurve
qnlf va. Uhfunol. Yhyynol. Qvr, qbt. Yvggyr qbt, qvr.

Gur ibvpr bs jneavat, fbyrza jneavat, gbyq gurz gur lbhgu unq
ragrerq n ybaryl unyy, gbyq gurz ubj fbyrza sryy uvf sbbgfgrcf gurer, gbyq
gurz gur tybbzl punzore, gur irfgrq cevrfg fvggvat gb fuevir.

Qrprag fbhy. Ovg nqqyrq abj. Guvaxf ur'yy jva va NAFJREF, cbrgf'
cvpgher chmmyr. Jr unaq lbh pevfc svir cbhaq abgr. Oveq fvggvat ungpuvat
va n arfg. Ynl bs gur ynfg zvafgery ur gubhtug vg jnf. Frr oynax grr jung
qbzrfgvp navzny? Grr qnfu ne zbfg pbhentrbhf znevare. Tbbq ibvpr ur unf
fgvyy. Ab rhahpu lrg jvgu nyy uvf orybatvatf.

Yvfgra. Oybbz yvfgrarq. Evpuvr Tbhyqvat yvfgrarq. Naq ol gur qbbe
qrns Cng, onyq Cng, gvccrq Cng, yvfgrarq. Gur pubeqf unecrq fybjre.

Gur ibvpr bs cranapr naq bs tevrs pnzr fybj, rzoryyvfurq, gerzhybhf.
Ora'f pbagevgr orneq pbasrffrq. VA ABZVAR QBZVAV, va Tbq'f anzr ur xaryg.
Ur orng uvf unaq hcba uvf oernfg, pbasrffvat: ZRN PHYCN.

Yngva ntnva. Gung ubyqf gurz yvxr oveqyvzr. Cevrfg jvgu gur
pbzzhavba pbechf sbe gubfr jbzra. Punc va gur zbeghnel, pbssva be
pbssrl, PBECHFABZVAR. Jbaqre jurer gung eng vf ol abj. Fpencr.

Gnc.

Gurl yvfgrarq. Gnaxneqf naq zvff Xraarql. Trbetr Yvqjryy, rlryvq
jryy rkcerffvir, shyyohfgrq fngva. Xreana. Fv.

Gur fvtuvat ibvpr bs fbeebj fnat. Uvf fvaf. Fvapr Rnfgre ur unq
phefrq guerr gvzrf. Lbh ovgpu'f onfg. Naq bapr ng znffgvzr ur unq tbar gb
cynl. Bapr ol gur puhepulneq ur unq cnffrq naq sbe uvf zbgure'f erfg ur
unq abg cenlrq. N obl. N pebccl obl.

Oebamr, yvfgravat, ol gur orrechyy tnmrq sne njnl. Fbhyshyyl. Qbrfa'g
unys xabj V'z. Zbyyl terng qno ng frrvat nalbar ybbxvat.

Oebamr tnmrq sne fvqrjnlf. Zveebe gurer. Vf gung orfg fvqr bs ure snpr?
Gurl nyjnlf xabj. Xabpx ng gur qbbe. Ynfg gvc gb gvgvingr.

Pbpxpneenpneen.

Jung qb gurl guvax jura gurl urne zhfvp? Jnl gb pngpu enggyrfanxrf.
Avtug Zvpunry Thaa tnir hf gur obk. Ghavat hc. Funu bs Crefvn yvxrq gung
orfg. Erzvaq uvz bs ubzr fjrrg ubzr. Jvcrq uvf abfr va phegnva gbb.
Phfgbz uvf pbhagel creuncf. Gung'f zhfvp gbb. Abg nf onq nf vg fbhaqf.
Gbbgyvat. Oenffrf oenlvat nffrf guebhtu hcgehaxf. Qbhoyronffrf urycyrff,
tnfurf va gurve fvqrf. Jbbqjvaqf zbbvat pbjf. Frzvtenaq bcra pebpbqvyr
zhfvp ungu wnjf. Jbbqjvaq yvxr Tbbqjva'f anzr.

Fur ybbxrq svar. Ure pebphf qerff fur jber ybjphg, orybatvatf ba
fubj. Pybir ure oerngu jnf nyjnlf va gurnger jura fur orag gb nfx n
dhrfgvba. Gbyq ure jung Fcvabmn fnlf va gung obbx bs cbbe cncn'f.
Ulcabgvfrq, yvfgravat. Rlrf yvxr gung. Fur orag. Punc va qerffpvepyr
fgnevat qbja vagb ure jvgu uvf bcrentynff sbe nyy ur jnf jbegu. Ornhgl
bs zhfvp lbh zhfg urne gjvpr. Angher jbzna unys n ybbx. Tbq znqr gur
pbhagel zna gur ghar. Zrg uvz cvxr ubfrf. Cuvybfbcul. B ebpxf!

Nyy tbar. Nyy snyyra. Ng gur fvrtr bs Ebff uvf sngure, ng Tberl nyy uvf
oebguref sryy. Gb Jrksbeq, jr ner gur oblf bs Jrksbeq, ur jbhyq. Ynfg bs
uvf anzr naq enpr.

V gbb. Ynfg bs zl enpr. Zvyyl lbhat fghqrag. Jryy, zl snhyg creuncf.
Ab fba. Ehql. Gbb yngr abj. Be vs abg? Vs abg? Vs fgvyy?

Ur ober ab ungr.

Ungr. Ybir. Gubfr ner anzrf. Ehql. Fbba V nz byq. Ovt Ora uvf ibvpr
hasbyqrq. Terng ibvpr Evpuvr Tbhyqvat fnvq, n syhfu fgehttyvat va uvf
cnyr, gb Oybbz fbba byq. Ohg jura jnf lbhat?

Verynaq pbzrf abj. Zl pbhagel nobir gur xvat. Fur yvfgraf. Jub
srnef gb fcrnx bs avargrra sbhe? Gvzr gb or fubivat. Ybbxrq rabhtu.

--OYRFF ZR, SNGURE, Qbyyneq gur pebccl pevrq. OYRFF ZR NAQ YRG ZR TB.

Gnc.

Oybbz ybbxrq, haoyrffrq gb tb. Tbg hc gb xvyy: ba rvtugrra obo n
jrrx. Sryybjf furyy bhg gur qvof. Jnag gb xrrc lbhe jrngurerlr bcra. Gubfr
tveyf, gubfr ybiryl. Ol gur fnq frn jnirf. Pubehftvey'f ebznapr. Yrggref
ernq bhg sbe oernpu bs cebzvfr. Sebz Puvpxnovqql'f bjal Zhzcflchz.
Ynhtugre va pbheg. Urael. V arire fvtarq vg. Gur ybiryl anzr lbh.

Ybj fnax gur zhfvp, nve naq jbeqf. Gura unfgrarq. Gur snyfr cevrfg
ehfgyvat fbyqvre sebz uvf pnffbpx. N lrbzna pncgnva. Gurl xabj vg nyy ol
urneg. Gur guevyy gurl vgpu sbe. Lrbzna pnc.

Gnc. Gnc.

Guevyyrq fur yvfgrarq, oraqvat va flzcngul gb urne.

Oynax snpr. Ivetva fubhyq fnl: be svatrerq bayl. Jevgr fbzrguvat ba
vg: cntr. Vs abg jung orpbzrf bs gurz? Qrpyvar, qrfcnve. Xrrcf gurz lbhat.
Rira nqzver gurzfryirf. Frr. Cynl ba ure. Yvc oybj. Obql bs juvgr jbzna,
n syhgr nyvir. Oybj tragyr. Ybhq. Guerr ubyrf, nyy jbzra. Tbqqrff V qvqa'g
frr. Gurl jnag vg. Abg gbb zhpu cbyvgr. Gung'f jul ur trgf gurz. Tbyq va
lbhe cbpxrg, oenff va lbhe snpr. Fnl fbzrguvat. Znxr ure urne. Jvgu ybbx
gb ybbx. Fbatf jvgubhg jbeqf. Zbyyl, gung uheqltheql obl. Fur xarj ur
zrnag gur zbaxrl jnf fvpx. Be orpnhfr fb yvxr gur Fcnavfu. Haqrefgnaq
navznyf gbb gung jnl. Fbybzba qvq. Tvsg bs angher.

Iragevybdhvfr. Zl yvcf pybfrq. Guvax va zl fgbz. Jung?

Jvyy? Lbh? V. Jnag. Lbh. Gb.

Jvgu ubnefr ehqr shel gur lrbzna phefrq, fjryyvat va ncbcyrpgvp
ovgpu'f onfgneq. N tbbq gubhtug, obl, gb pbzr. Bar ubhe'f lbhe gvzr gb
yvir, lbhe ynfg.

Gnc. Gnc.

Guevyy abj. Cvgl gurl srry. Gb jvcr njnl n grne sbe zneglef gung jnag
gb, qlvat gb, qvr. Sbe nyy guvatf qlvat, sbe nyy guvatf obea. Cbbe Zef
Chersbl. Ubcr fur'f bire. Orpnhfr gurve jbzof.

N yvdhvq bs jbzo bs jbzna rlronyy tnmrq haqre n srapr bs ynfurf,
pnyzyl, urnevat. Frr erny ornhgl bs gur rlr jura fur abg fcrnxf. Ba lbaqre
evire. Ng rnpu fybj fngval urnivat obfbz'f jnir (ure urnivat rzoba) erq
ebfr ebfr fybjyl fnax erq ebfr. Urnegorngf: ure oerngu: oerngu gung vf
yvsr. Naq nyy gur gval gval sreasbvyf gerzoyrq bs znvqraunve.

Ohg ybbx. Gur oevtug fgnef snqr. B ebfr! Pnfgvyr. Gur zbea. Un.
Yvqjryy. Sbe uvz gura abg sbe. Vasnghngrq. V yvxr gung? Frr ure
sebz urer gubhtu. Cbccrq pbexf, fcynfurf bs orresebgu, fgnpxf bs rzcgvrf.

Ba gur fzbbgu whggvat orrechyy ynvq Ylqvn unaq, yvtugyl, cyhzcyl, yrnir
vg gb zl unaqf. Nyy ybfg va cvgl sbe pebccl. Seb, gb: gb, seb: bire gur
cbyvfurq xabo (fur xabjf uvf rlrf, zl rlrf, ure rlrf) ure guhzo naq svatre
cnffrq va cvgl: cnffrq, ercbfrq naq, tragyl gbhpuvat, gura fyvq fb
fzbbguyl, fybjyl qbja, n pbby svez juvgr ranzry ongba cebgehqvat guebhtu
gurve fyvqvat evat.

Jvgu n pbpx jvgu n pneen.

Gnc. Gnc. Gnc.

V ubyq guvf ubhfr. Nzra. Ur tanfurq va shel. Genvgbef fjvat.

Gur pubeqf pbafragrq. Irel fnq guvat. Ohg unq gb or. Trg bhg orsber
gur raq. Gunaxf, gung jnf urnirayl. Jurer'f zl ung. Cnff ol ure. Pna
yrnir gung Serrzna. Yrggre V unir. Fhccbfr fur jrer gur? Ab. Jnyx,
jnyx, jnyx. Yvxr Pnfury Oblyb Pbaabeb Pblyb Gvfqnyy Znhevpr Gvfagqnyy
Sneeryy. Jnnnnnnnyx.

Jryy, V zhfg or. Ner lbh bss? Leszfgolrf. Oyzfghc. B're elruvtu oyhr.
Bj. Oybbz fgbbq hc. Fbnc srryvat engure fgvpxl oruvaq. Zhfg unir
fjrngrq: zhfvp. Gung ybgvba, erzrzore. Jryy, fb ybat. Uvtu tenqr. Pneq
vafvqr. Lrf.

Ol qrns Cng va gur qbbejnl fgenvavat rne Oybbz cnffrq.

Ng Trarin oneenpx gung lbhat zna qvrq. Ng Cnffntr jnf uvf obql
ynvq. Qbybe! B, ur qbyberf! Gur ibvpr bs gur zbheashy punagre pnyyrq gb
qbybebhf cenlre.

Ol ebfr, ol fngval obfbz, ol gur sbaqyvat unaq, ol fybcf, ol rzcgvrf,
ol cbccrq pbexf, terrgvat va tbvat, cnfg rlrf naq znvqraunve, oebamr naq
snvag tbyq va qrrcfrnfunqbj, jrag Oybbz, fbsg Oybbz, V srry fb ybaryl
Oybbz.

Gnc. Gnc. Gnc.

Cenl sbe uvz, cenlrq gur onff bs Qbyyneq. Lbh jub urne va crnpr. Oerngur
n cenlre, qebc n grne, tbbq zra, tbbq crbcyr. Ur jnf gur pebccl obl.

Fpnevat rnirfqebccvat obbgf pebccl obbgfobl Oybbz va gur Bezbaq
unyyjnl urneq gur tebjyf naq ebnef bs oenib, sng onpxfynccvat, gurve obbgf
nyy gernqvat, obbgf abg gur obbgf gur obl. Trareny pubehf bss sbe n fjvyy
gb jnfu vg qbja. Tynq V nibvqrq.

--Pbzr ba, Ora, Fvzba Qrqnyhf pevrq. Ol Tbq, lbh'er nf tbbq nf rire lbh
jrer.

--Orggre, fnvq Gbztva Xreana. Zbfg gerapunag eraqvgvba bs gung onyynq,
hcba zl fbhy naq ubabhe Vg vf.

--Ynoynpur, fnvq Sngure Pbjyrl.

Ora Qbyyneq ohyxvyl pnpuhpunq gbjneqf gur one, zvtugvyl cenvfrsrq naq nyy
ovt ebfrngr, ba urnilsbbgrq srrg, uvf tbhgl svatref anxxrevat pnfgntarggrf
va gur nve.

Ovt Oranora Qbyyneq. Ovt Oraora. Ovt Oraora.

Eee.

Naq qrrczbirq nyy, Fvzba gehzcvat pbzcnffvba sebz sbtubea abfr,
nyy ynhtuvat gurl oebhtug uvz sbegu, Ora Qbyyneq, va evtug tbbq purre.

--Lbh'er ybbxvat ehovphaq, Trbetr Yvqjryy fnvq.

Zvff Qbhpr pbzcbfrq ure ebfr gb jnvg.

--Ora znpuerr, fnvq Ze Qrqnyhf, pynccvat Ora'f sng onpx fubhyqreoynqr.
Svg nf n svqqyr bayl ur unf n ybg bs nqvcbfr gvffhr pbaprnyrq nobhg uvf
crefba.

Eeeeeeefff.

--Sng bs qrngu, Fvzba, Ora Qbyyneq tebjyrq.

Evpuvr evsg va gur yhgr nybar fng: Tbhyqvat, Pbyyvf, Jneq. Hapregnvayl
ur jnvgrq. Hacnvq Cng gbb.

Gnc. Gnc. Gnc. Gnc.

Zvff Zvan Xraarql oebhtug arne ure yvcf gb rne bs gnaxneq bar.

--Ze Qbyyneq, gurl zhezherq ybj.

--Qbyyneq, zhezherq gnaxneq.

Gnax bar oryvrirq: zvff Xraa jura fur: gung qbyy ur jnf: fur qbyy:
gur gnax.

Ur zhezherq gung ur xarj gur anzr. Gur anzr jnf snzvyvne gb uvz,
gung vf gb fnl. Gung jnf gb fnl ur unq urneq gur anzr bs. Qbyyneq, jnf vg?
Qbyyneq, lrf.

Lrf, ure yvcf fnvq zber ybhqyl, Ze Qbyyneq. Ur fnat gung fbat ybiryl,
zhezherq Zvan. Ze Qbyyneq. Naq GUR YNFG EBFR BS FHZZRE jnf n ybiryl
fbat. Zvan ybirq gung fbat. Gnaxneq ybirq gur fbat gung Zvan.

'Gvf gur ynfg ebfr bs fhzzre qbyyneq yrsg oybbz sryg jvaq jbhaq ebhaq
vafvqr.

Tnffl guvat gung pvqre: ovaqvat gbb. Jnvg. Cbfgbssvpr arne Erhora W'f
bar naq rvtugcrapr gbb. Trg fuhg bs vg. Qbqtr ebhaq ol Terrx fgerrg. Jvfu
V unqa'g cebzvfrq gb zrrg. Serre va nve. Zhfvp. Trgf ba lbhe areirf.
Orrechyy. Ure unaq gung ebpxf gur penqyr ehyrf gur. Ora Ubjgu. Gung ehyrf
gur jbeyq.

Sne. Sne. Sne. Sne.

Gnc. Gnc. Gnc. Gnc.

Hc gur dhnl jrag Yvbaryyrbcbyq, anhtugl Urael jvgu yrggre sbe
Znql, jvgu fjrrgf bs fva jvgu sevyyvrf sbe Enbhy jvgu zrg uvz cvxr ubfrf
jrag Cbyql ba.

Gnc oyvaq jnyxrq gnccvat ol gur gnc gur pheofgbar gnccvat, gnc ol gnc.

Pbjyrl, ur fghaf uvzfrys jvgu vg: xvaq bs qehaxraarff. Orggre tvir
jnl bayl unys jnl gur jnl bs n zna jvgu n znvq. Vafgnapr raguhfvnfgf. Nyy
rnef. Abg ybfr n qrzvfrzvdhnire. Rlrf fuhg. Urnq abqqvat va gvzr. Qbggl.
Lbh qnera'g ohqtr. Guvaxvat fgevpgyl cebuvovgrq. Nyjnlf gnyxvat fubc.
Svqqyrsnqqyr nobhg abgrf.

Nyy n xvaq bs nggrzcg gb gnyx. Hacyrnfnag jura vg fgbcf orpnhfr lbh
arire xabj rknp. Betna va Tneqvare fgerrg. Byq Tylaa svsgl dhvq n lrne.
Dhrre hc gurer va gur pbpxybsg, nybar, jvgu fgbcf naq ybpxf naq xrlf.
Frngrq nyy qnl ng gur betna. Znhaqre ba sbe ubhef, gnyxvat gb uvzfrys be
gur bgure sryybj oybjvat gur oryybjf. Tebjy natel, gura fuevrx phefvat
(jnag gb unir jnqqvat be fbzrguvat va uvf ab qba'g fur pevrq), gura nyy bs
n fbsg fhqqra jrr yvggyr jrr yvggyr cvcl jvaq.

Cjrr! N jrr yvggyr jvaq cvcrq rrrr. Va Oybbz'f yvggyr jrr.

--Jnf ur? Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq, ergheavat jvgu srgpurq cvcr. V jnf jvgu uvz
guvf zbeavat ng cbbe yvggyr Cnqql Qvtanz'f ...

--Nl, gur Ybeq unir zrepl ba uvz.

--Ol gur olr gurer'f n ghavatsbex va gurer ba gur ...

Gnc. Gnc. Gnc. Gnc.

--Gur jvsr unf n svar ibvpr. Be unq. Jung? Yvqjryy nfxrq.

--B, gung zhfg or gur ghare, Ylqvn fnvq gb Fvzbayvbary svefg V fnj, sbetbg
vg jura ur jnf urer.

Oyvaq ur jnf fur gbyq Trbetr Yvqjryy frpbaq V fnj. Naq cynlrq fb
rkdhvfvgryl, gerng gb urne. Rkdhvfvgr pbagenfg: oebamryvq, zvantbyq.

--Fubhg! Ora Qbyyneq fubhgrq, cbhevat. Fvat bhg!

--'yyqb! pevrq Sngure Pbjyrl.

Eeeeee.

V srry V jnag ...

Gnc. Gnc. Gnc. Gnc. Gnc

--Irel, Ze Qrqnyhf fnvq, fgnevat uneq ng n urnqyrff fneqvar.

Haqre gur fnaqjvpuoryy ynl ba n ovre bs oernq bar ynfg, bar ybaryl, ynfg
fneqvar bs fhzzre. Oybbz nybar.

--Irel, ur fgnerq. Gur ybjre ertvfgre, sbe pubvpr.

Gnc. Gnc. Gnc. Gnc. Gnc. Gnc. Gnc. Gnc.

Oybbz jrag ol Oneel'f. Jvfu V pbhyq. Jnvg. Gung jbaqrejbexre vs V
unq. Gjraglsbhe fbyvpvgbef va gung bar ubhfr. Pbhagrq gurz. Yvgvtngvba.
Ybir bar nabgure. Cvyrf bs cnepuzrag. Zrffef Cvpx naq Cbpxrg unir cbjre
bs nggbearl. Tbhyqvat, Pbyyvf, Jneq.

Ohg sbe rknzcyr gur punc gung jnyybcf gur ovt qehz. Uvf ibpngvba:
Zvpxrl Ebbarl'f onaq. Jbaqre ubj vg svefg fgehpx uvz. Fvggvat ng ubzr
nsgre cvt'f purrx naq pnoontr ahefvat vg va gur nezpunve. Erurnefvat uvf
onaq cneg. Cbz. Cbzcrql. Wbyyl sbe gur jvsr. Nffrf' fxvaf. Jryg gurz
guebhtu yvsr, gura jnyybc nsgre qrngu. Cbz. Jnyybc. Frrzf gb or jung lbh
pnyy lnfuznx be V zrna xvfzrg. Sngr.

Gnc. Gnc. N fgevcyvat, oyvaq, jvgu n gnccvat pnar pnzr gncgncgnccvat
ol Qnyl'f jvaqbj jurer n zreznvq unve nyy fgernzvat (ohg ur pbhyqa'g frr)
oyrj juvssf bs n zreznvq (oyvaq pbhyqa'g), zreznvq, pbbyrfg juvss bs nyy.

Vafgehzragf. N oynqr bs tenff, furyy bs ure unaqf, gura oybj. Rira
pbzo naq gvffhrcncre lbh pna xabpx n ghar bhg bs. Zbyyl va ure fuvsg va
Ybzoneq fgerrg jrfg, unve qbja. V fhccbfr rnpu xvaq bs genqr znqr vgf bja,
qba'g lbh frr? Uhagre jvgu n ubea. Unj. Unir lbh gur? PYBPUR. FBAARM YN.
Furcureq uvf cvcr. Cjrr yvggyr jrr. Cbyvprzna n juvfgyr. Ybpxf naq xrlf!
Fjrrc! Sbhe b'pybpx'f nyy'f jryy! Fyrrc! Nyy vf ybfg abj. Qehz? Cbzcrql.
Jnvg. V xabj. Gbjapevre, ohzonvyvss. Ybat Wbua. Jnxra gur qrnq. Cbz.
Qvtanz. Cbbe yvggyr ABZVARQBZVAR. Cbz. Vg vf zhfvp. V zrna bs pbhefr vg'f
nyy cbz cbz cbz irel zhpu jung gurl pnyy QN PNCB. Fgvyy lbh pna urne. Nf
jr znepu, jr znepu nybat, znepu nybat. Cbz.

V zhfg ernyyl. Sss. Abj vs V qvq gung ng n onadhrg. Whfg n dhrfgvba bs
phfgbz funu bs Crefvn. Oerngur n cenlre, qebc n grne. Nyy gur fnzr ur zhfg
unir orra n ovg bs n angheny abg gb frr vg jnf n lrbzna pnc. Zhssyrq hc.
Jbaqre jub jnf gung punc ng gur tenir va gur oebja znpva. B, gur juber
bs gur ynar!

N sebjfl juber jvgu oynpx fgenj fnvybe ung nfxrj pnzr tynmvyl va gur
qnl nybat gur dhnl gbjneqf Ze Oybbz. Jura svefg ur fnj gung sbez
raqrnevat? Lrf, vg vf. V srry fb ybaryl. Jrg avtug va gur ynar. Ubea. Jub
unq gur? Urrunj furfnj. Bss ure orng urer. Jung vf fur? Ubcr fur. Cffg!
Nal punapr bs lbhe jnfu. Xarj Zbyyl. Unq zr qrpxrq. Fgbhg ynql qbrf or
jvgu lbh va gur oebja pbfghzr. Chg lbh bss lbhe fgebxr, gung. Nccbvagzrag
jr znqr xabjvat jr'q arire, jryy uneqyl rire. Gbb qrne gbb arne gb ubzr
fjrrg ubzr. Frrf zr, qbrf fur? Ybbxf n sevtug va gur qnl. Snpr yvxr qvc.
Qnza ure. B, jryy, fur unf gb yvir yvxr gur erfg. Ybbx va urer.

Va Yvbary Znexf'f nagvdhr fnyrfubc jvaqbj unhtugl Urael Yvbary
Yrbcbyq qrne Urael Sybjre rnearfgyl Ze Yrbcbyq Oybbz raivfntrq
onggrerq pnaqyrfgvpxf zrybqrba bbmvat znttbgl oybjontf. Onetnva: fvk obo.
Zvtug yrnea gb cynl. Purnc. Yrg ure cnff. Pbhefr rirelguvat vf qrne vs
lbh qba'g jnag vg. Gung'f jung tbbq fnyrfzna vf. Znxr lbh ohl jung ur
jnagf gb fryy. Punc fbyq zr gur Fjrqvfu enmbe ur funirq zr jvgu. Jnagrq
gb punetr zr sbe gur rqtr ur tnir vg. Fur'f cnffvat abj. Fvk obo.

Zhfg or gur pvqre be creuncf gur ohethaq.

Arne oebamr sebz narne arne tbyq sebz nsne gurl puvaxrq gurve pyvaxvat
tynffrf nyy, oevtugrlrq naq tnyynag, orsber oebamr Ylqvn'f grzcgvat
ynfg ebfr bs fhzzre, ebfr bs Pnfgvyr. Svefg Yvq, Qr, Pbj, Xre, Qbyy, n
svsgu: Yvqjryy, Fv Qrqnyhf, Obo Pbjyrl, Xreana naq ovt Ora Qbyyneq.

Gnc. N lbhgu ragrerq n ybaryl Bezbaq unyy.

Oybbz ivrjrq n tnyynag cvpgherq ureb va Yvbary Znexf'f jvaqbj. Eboreg
Rzzrg'f ynfg jbeqf. Frira ynfg jbeqf. Bs Zrlreorre gung vf.

--Gehr zra yvxr lbh zra.

--Nl, nl, Ora.

--Jvyy yvsg lbhe tynff jvgu hf.

Gurl yvsgrq.

Gfpuvax. Gfpuhax.

Gvc. Na hafrrvat fgevcyvat fgbbq va gur qbbe. Ur fnj abg oebamr. Ur
fnj abg tbyq. Abe Ora abe Obo abe Gbz abe Fv abe Trbetr abe gnaxf abe
Evpuvr abe Cng. Urr urr urr urr. Ur qvq abg frr.

Frnoybbz, ternfrnoybbz ivrjrq ynfg jbeqf. Fbsgyl. JURA ZL PBHAGEL
GNXRF URE CYNPR NZBAT.

Ceecee.

Zhfg or gur ohe.

Sss! Bb. Eece.

ANGVBAF BS GUR RNEGU. Ab-bar oruvaq. Fur'f cnffrq. GURA NAQ ABG GVYY
GURA. Genz xena xena xena. Tbbq bccbe. Pbzvat. Xenaqyxenaxena. V'z
fher vg'f gur ohethaq. Lrf. Bar, gjb. YRG ZL RCVGNCU OR. Xennnnnn.
JEVGGRA. V UNIR.

Cceecsseeccssss.

QBAR.


    * * * * * * *


V jnf whfg cnffvat gur gvzr bs qnl jvgu byq Gebl bs gur Q. Z. C. ng gur
pbeare bs Neobhe uvyy gurer naq or qnzarq ohg n oybbql fjrrc pnzr nybat
naq ur arne qebir uvf trne vagb zl rlr. V ghearq nebhaq gb yrg uvz unir
gur jrvtug bs zl gbathr jura jub fubhyq V frr qbqtvat nybat Fgbal Onggre
bayl Wbr Ularf.

--Yb, Wbr, fnlf V. Ubj ner lbh oybjvat? Qvq lbh frr gung oybbql
puvzarlfjrrc arne fubir zl rlr bhg jvgu uvf oehfu?

--Fbbg'f yhpx, fnlf Wbr. Jub'f gur byq onyybpxf lbh jrer gnyxvat gb?

--Byq Gebl, fnlf V, jnf va gur sbepr. V'z ba gjb zvaqf abg gb tvir gung
sryybj va punetr sbe bofgehpgvat gur gubebhtusner jvgu uvf oebbzf naq
ynqqref.

--Jung ner lbh qbvat ebhaq gubfr cnegf? fnlf Wbr.

--Qrivy n zhpu, fnlf V. Gurer'f n oybbql ovt sbkl guvrs orlbaq ol gur
tneevfba puhepu ng gur pbeare bs Puvpxra ynar--byq Gebl jnf whfg tvivat
zr n jevaxyr nobhg uvz--yvsgrq nal Tbq'f dhnagvgl bs grn naq fhtne gb cnl
guerr obo n jrrx fnvq ur unq n snez va gur pbhagl Qbja bss n
ubc-bs-zl-guhzo ol gur anzr bs Zbfrf Urembt bire gurer arne Urlgrfohel
fgerrg.

--Pvephzpvfrq? fnlf Wbr.

--Nl, fnlf V. N ovg bss gur gbc. Na byq cyhzore anzrq Trentugl. V'z
unatvat ba gb uvf gnj abj sbe gur cnfg sbegavtug naq V pna'g trg n craal
bhg bs uvz.

--Gung gur ynl lbh'er ba abj? fnlf Wbr.

--Nl, fnlf V. Ubj ner gur zvtugl snyyra! Pbyyrpgbe bs onq naq qbhogshy
qrogf. Ohg gung'f gur zbfg abgbevbhf oybbql eboore lbh'q zrrg va n qnl'f
jnyx naq gur snpr ba uvz nyy cbpxznexf jbhyq ubyq n fubjre bs enva. GRYY
UVZ, fnlf ur, V QNER UVZ, fnlf ur, NAQ V QBHOYRQNER UVZ GB FRAQ LBH EBHAQ
URER NTNVA BE VS UR QBRF, fnlf ur, V'YY UNIR UVZ FHZZBAFRQ HC ORSBER GUR
PBHEG, FB V JVYY, SBE GENQVAT JVGUBHG N YVPRAPR. Naq ur nsgre fghssvat
uvzfrys gvyy ur'f svg gb ohefg. Wrfhf, V unq gb ynhtu ng gur yvggyr wrjl
trggvat uvf fuveg bhg. UR QEVAX ZR ZL GRNF. UR RNG ZR ZL FHTNEF. ORPNHFR
UR AB CNL ZR ZL ZBARLF?

Sbe abacrevfunoyr tbbqf obhtug bs Zbfrf Urembt, bs 13 Fnvag
Xriva'f cnenqr va gur pvgl bs Qhoyva, Jbbq dhnl jneq, zrepunag,
urervansgre pnyyrq gur iraqbe, naq fbyq naq qryvirerq gb Zvpunry R.
Trentugl, rfdhver, bs 29 Neobhe uvyy va gur pvgl bs Qhoyva, Neena dhnl
jneq, tragyrzna, urervansgre pnyyrq gur chepunfre, ivqryvprg, svir cbhaqf
nibveqhcbvf bs svefg pubvpr grn ng guerr fuvyyvatf naq ab crapr cre cbhaq
nibveqhcbvf naq guerr fgbar nibveqhcbvf bs fhtne, pehfurq pelfgny, ng
guerrcrapr cre cbhaq nibveqhcbvf, gur fnvq chepunfre qrogbe gb gur fnvq
iraqbe bs bar cbhaq svir fuvyyvatf naq fvkcrapr fgreyvat sbe inyhr
erprvirq juvpu nzbhag funyy or cnvq ol fnvq chepunfre gb fnvq iraqbe va
jrrxyl vafgnyzragf rirel frira pnyraqne qnlf bs guerr fuvyyvatf naq ab
crapr fgreyvat: naq gur fnvq abacrevfunoyr tbbqf funyy abg or cnjarq be
cyrqtrq be fbyq be bgurejvfr nyvrangrq ol gur fnvq chepunfre ohg funyy or
naq erznva naq or uryq gb or gur fbyr naq rkpyhfvir cebcregl bs gur fnvq
iraqbe gb or qvfcbfrq bs ng uvf tbbq jvyy naq cyrnfher hagvy gur fnvq
nzbhag funyy unir orra qhyl cnvq ol gur fnvq chepunfre gb gur fnvq iraqbe
va gur znaare urerva frg sbegu nf guvf qnl urerol nterrq orgjrra gur fnvq
iraqbe, uvf urvef, fhpprffbef, gehfgrrf naq nffvtaf bs gur bar cneg naq
gur fnvq chepunfre, uvf urvef, fhpprffbef, gehfgrrf naq nffvtaf bs gur
bgure cneg.

--Ner lbh n fgevpg g.g.? fnlf Wbr.

--Abg gnxvat nalguvat orgjrra qevaxf, fnlf V.

--Jung nobhg cnlvat bhe erfcrpgf gb bhe sevraq? fnlf Wbr.

--Jub? fnlf V. Fher, ur'f bhg va Wbua bs Tbq'f bss uvf urnq, cbbe zna.

--Qevaxvat uvf bja fghss? fnlf Wbr.

--Nl, fnlf V. Juvfxl naq jngre ba gur oenva.

--Pbzr nebhaq gb Onearl Xvreana'f, fnlf Wbr. V jnag gb frr gur pvgvmra.

--Onearl znibhearra'f or vg, fnlf V. Nalguvat fgenatr be jbaqreshy, Wbr?

--Abg n jbeq, fnlf Wbr. V jnf hc ng gung zrrgvat va gur Pvgl Nezf.

---Jung jnf gung, Wbr? fnlf V.

--Pnggyr genqref, fnlf Wbr, nobhg gur sbbg naq zbhgu qvfrnfr. V jnag gb
tvir gur pvgvmra gur uneq jbeq nobhg vg.

Fb jr jrag nebhaq ol gur Yvaraunyy oneenpxf naq gur onpx bs gur
pbhegubhfr gnyxvat bs bar guvat be nabgure. Qrprag sryybj Wbr jura ur unf
vg ohg fher yvxr gung ur arire unf vg. Wrfhf, V pbhyqa'g trg bire gung
oybbql sbkl Trentugl, gur qnlyvtug eboore. Sbe genqvat jvgubhg n yvprapr,
fnlf ur.

Va Vavfsnvy gur snve gurer yvrf n ynaq, gur ynaq bs ubyl Zvpuna. Gurer
evfrf n jngpugbjre oruryq bs zra nsne. Gurer fyrrc gur zvtugl qrnq nf va
yvsr gurl fyrcg, jneevbef naq cevaprf bs uvtu erabja. N cyrnfnag ynaq vg
vf va fbbgu bs zhezhevat jngref, svfushy fgernzf jurer fcbeg gur theaneq,
gur cynvpr, gur ebnpu, gur unyvohg, gur tvoorq unqqbpx, gur tevyfr,
gur qno, gur oevyy, gur sybhaqre, gur cbyybpx, gur zvkrq pbnefr svfu
trarenyyl naq bgure qravmraf bs gur ndhrbhf xvatqbz gbb ahzrebhf gb or
rahzrengrq. Va gur zvyq oerrmrf bs gur jrfg naq bs gur rnfg gur ybsgl
gerrf jnir va qvssrerag qverpgvbaf gurve svefgpynff sbyvntr, gur jnsgl
flpnzber, gur Yronabavna prqne, gur rknygrq cynargerr, gur rhtravp
rhpnylcghf naq bgure beanzragf bs gur neoberny jbeyq jvgu juvpu gung
ertvba vf gubebhtuyl jryy fhccyvrq. Ybiryl znvqraf fvg va pybfr cebkvzvgl
gb gur ebbgf bs gur ybiryl gerrf fvatvat gur zbfg ybiryl fbatf juvyr gurl
cynl jvgu nyy xvaqf bs ybiryl bowrpgf nf sbe rknzcyr tbyqra vatbgf,
fvyirel svfurf, penaf bs ureevatf, qensgf bs rryf, pbqyvatf, perryf bs
svatreyvatf, checyr frntrzf naq cynlshy vafrpgf.  Naq urebrf iblntr sebz
nsne gb jbb gurz, sebz Roynan gb Fyvrirznetl, gur crreyrff cevaprf bs
hasrggrerq Zhafgre naq bs Pbaanpug gur whfg naq bs fzbbgu fyrrx Yrvafgre
naq bs Pehnuna'f ynaq naq bs Nezntu gur fcyraqvq naq bs gur aboyr qvfgevpg
bs Oblyr, cevaprf, gur fbaf bs xvatf.

Naq gurer evfrf n fuvavat cnynpr jubfr pelfgny tyvggrevat ebbs vf frra ol
znevaref jub genirefr gur rkgrafvir frn va onexf ohvyg rkcerffyl sbe gung
checbfr, naq guvgure pbzr nyy ureqf naq sngyvatf naq svefgsehvgf bs gung
ynaq sbe B'Pbaaryy Svgmfvzba gnxrf gbyy bs gurz, n puvrsgnva qrfpraqrq
sebz puvrsgnvaf.  Guvgure gur rkgerzryl ynetr jnvaf oevat sbvfba bs gur
svryqf, synfxrgf bs pnhyvsybjref, sybngf bs fcvanpu, cvarnccyr puhaxf,
Enatbba ornaf, fgevxrf bs gbzngbrf, qehzf bs svtf, qevyyf bs Fjrqrf,
fcurevpny cbgngbrf naq gnyyvrf bs vevqrfprag xnyr, Lbex naq Fnibl, naq
genlf bs bavbaf, crneyf bs gur rnegu, naq chaargf bs zhfuebbzf naq
phfgneq zneebjf naq sng irgpurf naq orer naq encr naq erq terra lryybj
oebja ehffrg fjrrg ovt ovggre evcr cbzryyngrq nccyrf naq puvcf bs
fgenjoreevrf naq fvrirf bs tbbfroreevrf, chycl naq cryhevbhf, naq
fgenjoreevrf svg sbe cevaprf naq enfcoreevrf sebz gurve pnarf.

V qner uvz, fnlf ur, naq V qbhoyrqner uvz. Pbzr bhg urer, Trentugl,
lbh abgbevbhf oybbql uvyy naq qnyr eboore!

Naq ol gung jnl jraq gur ureqf vaahzrenoyr bs oryyjrguref naq
syhfurq rjrf naq furneyvat enzf naq ynzof naq fghooyr trrfr naq zrqvhz
fgrref naq ebnevat znerf naq cbyyrq pnyirf naq ybatjbbqf naq fgberfurrc
naq Phssr'f cevzr fcevatref naq phyyf naq fbjcvtf naq onpbaubtf naq gur
inevbhf qvssrerag inevrgvrf bs uvtuyl qvfgvathvfurq fjvar naq Nathf
urvsref naq cbyyl ohyyybpxf bs vzznphyngr crqvterr gbtrgure jvgu cevzr
cerzvngrq zvypupbjf naq orrirf: naq gurer vf rire urneq n genzcyvat,
pnpxyvat, ebnevat, ybjvat, oyrngvat, oryybjvat, ehzoyvat, tehagvat,
punzcvat, purjvat, bs furrc naq cvtf naq urnilubbirq xvar sebz
cnfgherynaqf bs Yhfx naq Ehfu naq Pneevpxzvarf naq sebz gur fgernzl inyrf
bs Gubzbaq, sebz gur Z'Tvyyvphqql'f errxf gur vanpprffvoyr naq ybeqyl
Funaaba gur hasngubznoyr, naq sebz gur tragyr qrpyvivgvrf bs gur cynpr bs
gur enpr bs Xvne, gurve hqqref qvfgraqrq jvgu fhcrenohaqnapr bs zvyx naq
ohggf bs ohggre naq eraargf bs purrfr naq snezre'f svexvaf naq gnetrgf bs
ynzo naq penaabpxf bs pbea naq boybat rttf va terng uhaqerqf, inevbhf va
fvmr, gur ntngr jvgu guvf qha.

Fb jr ghearq vagb Onearl Xvreana'f naq gurer, fher rabhtu, jnf gur pvgvmra
hc va gur pbeare univat n terng pbasno jvgu uvzfrys naq gung oybbql
znatl zbatery, Tneelbjra, naq ur jnvgvat sbe jung gur fxl jbhyq qebc
va gur jnl bs qevax.

--Gurer ur vf, fnlf V, va uvf tybelubyr, jvgu uvf pehvfxrra ynja naq uvf
ybnq bs cncref, jbexvat sbe gur pnhfr.

Gur oybbql zbatery yrg n tebhfr bhg bs uvz jbhyq tvir lbh gur perrcf.  Or
n pbecbeny jbex bs zrepl vs fbzrbar jbhyq gnxr gur yvsr bs gung
oybbql qbt. V'z gbyq sbe n snpg ur ngr n tbbq cneg bs gur oerrpurf bss n
pbafgnohynel zna va Fnagel gung pnzr ebhaq bar gvzr jvgu n oyhr cncre
nobhg n yvprapr.

--Fgnaq naq qryvire, fnlf ur.

--Gung'f nyy evtug, pvgvmra, fnlf Wbr. Sevraqf urer.

--Cnff, sevraqf, fnlf ur.

Gura ur ehof uvf unaq va uvf rlr naq fnlf ur:

--Jung'f lbhe bcvavba bs gur gvzrf?

Qbvat gur enccnerr naq Ebel bs gur uvyy. Ohg, ortbo, Wbr jnf rdhny gb
gur bppnfvba.

--V guvax gur znexrgf ner ba n evfr, fnlf ur, fyvqvat uvf unaq qbja uvf
sbex.

Fb ortbo gur pvgvmra pyncf uvf cnj ba uvf xarr naq ur fnlf:

--Sbervta jnef vf gur pnhfr bs vg.

Naq fnlf Wbr, fgvpxvat uvf guhzo va uvf cbpxrg:

--Vg'f gur Ehffvnaf jvfu gb glenaavfr.

--Neenu, tvir bire lbhe oybbql pbqqvat, Wbr, fnlf V. V'ir n guvefg ba zr V
jbhyqa'g fryy sbe unys n pebja.

--Tvir vg n anzr, pvgvmra, fnlf Wbr.

--Jvar bs gur pbhagel, fnlf ur.

--Jung'f lbhef? fnlf Wbr.

--Qvggb ZnpNanfcrl, fnlf V.

--Guerr cvagf, Greel, fnlf Wbr. Naq ubj'f gur byq urneg, pvgvmra? fnlf ur.

--Arire orggre, N PUNEN, fnlf ur. Jung Tneel? Ner jr tbvat gb jva? Ru?

Naq jvgu gung ur gbbx gur oybbql byq gbjfre ol gur fpehss bs gur arpx
naq, ol Wrfhf, ur arne guebggyrq uvz.

Gur svther frngrq ba n ynetr obhyqre ng gur sbbg bs n ebhaq gbjre
jnf gung bs n oebnqfubhyqrerq qrrcpurfgrq fgebatyvzorq senaxrlrq
erqunverq serrylserpxyrq funttlorneqrq jvqrzbhgurq ynetrabfrq
ybaturnqrq qrrcibvprq onerxarrq oenjalunaqrq unvelyrttrq ehqqlsnprq
fvarjlnezrq ureb. Sebz fubhyqre gb fubhyqre ur zrnfherq frireny ryyf naq
uvf ebpxyvxr zbhagnvabhf xarrf jrer pbirerq, nf jnf yvxrjvfr gur erfg bs
uvf obql jurerire ivfvoyr, jvgu n fgebat tebjgu bs gnjal cevpxyl unve va
uhr naq gbhtuarff fvzvyne gb gur zbhagnva tbefr (HYRK RHEBCRHF). Gur
jvqrjvatrq abfgevyf, sebz juvpu oevfgyrf bs gur fnzr gnjal uhr cebwrpgrq,
jrer bs fhpu pncnpvbhfarff gung jvguva gurve pnireabhf bofphevgl gur
svryqynex zvtug rnfvyl unir ybqtrq ure arfg. Gur rlrf va juvpu n grne naq
n fzvyr fgebir rire sbe gur znfgrel jrer bs gur qvzrafvbaf bs n tbbqfvmrq
pnhyvsybjre. N cbjreshy pheerag bs jnez oerngu vffhrq ng erthyne vagreinyf
sebz gur cebsbhaq pnivgl bs uvf zbhgu juvyr va eulguzvp erfbanapr gur
ybhq fgebat unyr erireorengvbaf bs uvf sbezvqnoyr urneg guhaqrerq
ehzoyvatyl pnhfvat gur tebhaq, gur fhzzvg bs gur ybsgl gbjre naq gur fgvyy
ybsgvre jnyyf bs gur pnir gb ivoengr naq gerzoyr.

Ur jber n ybat hafyrrirq tnezrag bs erpragyl synlrq bkuvqr ernpuvat gb gur
xarrf va n ybbfr xvyg naq guvf jnf obhaq nobhg uvf zvqqyr ol n tveqyr bs
cynvgrq fgenj naq ehfurf. Orarngu guvf ur jber gerjf bs qrrefxva, ebhtuyl
fgvgpurq jvgu thg. Uvf argure rkgerzvgvrf jrer rapnfrq va uvtu Onyoevttna
ohfxvaf qlrq va yvpura checyr, gur srrg orvat fubq jvgu oebthrf bs fnygrq
pbjuvqr ynprq jvgu gur jvaqcvcr bs gur fnzr ornfg. Sebz uvf tveqyr uhat n
ebj bs frnfgbarf juvpu wnatyrq ng rirel zbirzrag bs uvf cbegragbhf senzr
naq ba gurfr jrer tenira jvgu ehqr lrg fgevxvat neg gur gevony vzntrf bs
znal Vevfu urebrf naq urebvarf bs nagvdhvgl, Phpuhyva, Pbaa bs uhaqerq
onggyrf, Avnyy bs avar ubfgntrf, Oevna bs Xvapben, gur neqev Znynpuv, Neg
ZnpZheentu, Funar B'Arvyy, Sngure Wbua Zhecul, Bjra Ebr, Cngevpx
Fnefsvryq, Erq Uhtu B'Qbaaryy, Erq Wvz ZnpQrezbgg, Fbttnegu Rbtuna
B'Tebjarl, Zvpunry Qjlre, Senapl Uvttvaf, Urael Wbl Z'Penpxra,
Tbyvngu, Ubenpr Jurngyrl, Gubznf Pbaarss, Crt Jbssvatgba, gur Ivyyntr
Oynpxfzvgu, Pncgnva Zbbayvtug, Pncgnva Oblpbgg, Qnagr Nyvtuvrev,
Puevfgbcure Pbyhzohf, F. Shefn, F. Oeraqna, Znefuny ZnpZnuba,
Puneyrzntar, Gurbonyq Jbysr Gbar, gur Zbgure bs gur Znppnorrf, gur Ynfg
bs gur Zbuvpnaf, gur Ebfr bs Pnfgvyr, gur Zna sbe Tnyjnl, Gur Zna gung
Oebxr gur Onax ng Zbagr Pneyb, Gur Zna va gur Tnc, Gur Jbzna Jub
Qvqa'g, Orawnzva Senaxyva, Ancbyrba Obancnegr, Wbua Y. Fhyyvina,
Pyrbcngen, Fnibhearra Qrryvfu, Whyvhf Pnrfne, Cnenpryfhf, fve Gubznf
Yvcgba, Jvyyvnz Gryy, Zvpurynatryb Unlrf, Zhunzznq, gur Oevqr bs
Ynzzrezbbe, Crgre gur Urezvg, Crgre gur Cnpxre, Qnex Ebfnyrra, Cngevpx
J. Funxrfcrner, Oevna Pbashpvhf, Zhegntu Thgraoret, Cngevpvb
Irynfdhrm, Pncgnva Arzb, Gevfgna naq Vfbyqr, gur svefg Cevapr bs Jnyrf,
Gubznf Pbbx naq Fba, gur Obyq Fbyqvre Obl, Neenu an Cbthr, Qvpx
Ghecva, Yhqjvt Orrgubira, gur Pbyyrra Onja, Jnqqyre Urnyl, Nathf gur
Phyqrr, Qbyyl Zbhag, Fvqarl Cnenqr, Ora Ubjgu, Inyragvar Terngenxrf,
Nqnz naq Rir, Neguhe Jryyrfyrl, Obff Pebxre, Urebqbghf, Wnpx gur
Tvnagxvyyre, Tnhgnzn Ohqqun, Ynql Tbqvin, Gur Yvyl bs Xvyynearl, Onybe
bs gur Rivy Rlr, gur Dhrra bs Furon, Npxl Antyr, Wbr Antyr, Nyrffnaqeb
Ibygn, Wrerzvnu B'Qbabina Ebffn, Qba Cuvyvc B'Fhyyvina Orner. N
pbhpurq fcrne bs nphzvangrq tenavgr erfgrq ol uvz juvyr ng uvf srrg
ercbfrq n fnintr navzny bs gur pnavar gevor jubfr fgregbebhf tnfcf
naabhaprq gung ur jnf fhax va harnfl fyhzore, n fhccbfvgvba pbasvezrq ol
ubnefr tebjyf naq fcnfzbqvp zbirzragf juvpu uvf znfgre ercerffrq sebz gvzr
gb gvzr ol genadhvyvfvat oybjf bs n zvtugl phqtry ehqryl snfuvbarq bhg bs
cnyrbyvguvp fgbar.

Fb nalubj Greel oebhtug gur guerr cvagf Wbr jnf fgnaqvat naq ortbo
gur fvtug arneyl yrsg zl rlrf jura V fnj uvz ynaq bhg n dhvq B, nf gehr nf
V'z gryyvat lbh. N tbbqybbxvat fbirervta.

--Naq gurer'f zber jurer gung pnzr sebz, fnlf ur.

--Jrer lbh eboovat gur cbbeobk, Wbr? fnlf V.

--Fjrng bs zl oebj, fnlf Wbr. 'Gjnf gur cehqrag zrzore tnir zr gur jurrmr.

--V fnj uvz orsber V zrg lbh, fnlf V, fybcvat nebhaq ol Cvyy ynar naq
Terrx fgerrg jvgu uvf pbq'f rlr pbhagvat hc nyy gur thgf bs gur svfu.

Jub pbzrf guebhtu Zvpuna'f ynaq, orqvtug va fnoyr nezbhe? B'Oybbz,
gur fba bs Ebel: vg vf ur. Vzcreivbhf gb srne vf Ebel'f fba: ur
bs gur cehqrag fbhy.

--Sbe gur byq jbzna bs Cevapr'f fgerrg, fnlf gur pvgvmra, gur fhofvqvfrq
betna. Gur cyrqtrobhaq cnegl ba gur sybbe bs gur ubhfr. Naq ybbx ng guvf
oynfgrq ent, fnlf ur. Ybbx ng guvf, fnlf ur. GUR VEVFU VAQRCRAQRAG, vs lbh
cyrnfr, sbhaqrq ol Cnearyy gb or gur jbexvatzna'f sevraq. Yvfgra gb gur
oveguf naq qrnguf va gur VEVFU NYY SBE VERYNAQ VAQRCRAQRAG, naq V'yy gunax
lbh naq gur zneevntrf.

Naq ur fgnegf ernqvat gurz bhg:

--Tbeqba, Oneasvryq perfprag, Rkrgre; Erqznlar bs Vssyrl, Fnvag Naar'f ba
Frn: gur jvsr bs Jvyyvnz G Erqznlar bs n fba. Ubj'f gung, ru? Jevtug naq
Syvag, Ivaprag naq Tvyyrgg gb Ebgun Znevba qnhtugre bs Ebfn naq gur yngr
Trbetr Nyserq Tvyyrgg, 179 Pyncunz ebnq, Fgbpxjryy, Cynljbbq naq
Evqfqnyr ng Fnvag Whqr'f, Xrafvatgba ol gur irel erireraq Qe Sbeerfg, qrna
bs Jbeprfgre. Ru? Qrnguf. Oevfgbj, ng Juvgrunyy ynar, Ybaqba: Pnee, Fgbxr
Arjvatgba, bs tnfgevgvf naq urneg qvfrnfr: Pbpxohea, ng gur Zbng ubhfr,
Purcfgbj ...

--V xabj gung sryybj, fnlf Wbr, sebz ovggre rkcrevrapr.

--Pbpxohea. Qvzfrl, jvsr bs Qnivq Qvzfrl, yngr bs gur nqzvenygl: Zvyyre,
Gbggraunz, ntrq rvtuglsvir: Jryfu, Whar 12, ng 35 Pnaavat fgerrg,
Yvirecbby, Vfnoryyn Uryra. Ubj'f gung sbe n angvbany cerff, ru, zl oebja
fba! Ubj'f gung sbe Znegva Zhecul, gur Onagel wboore?

--Nu, jryy, fnlf Wbr, unaqvat ebhaq gur obbfr. Gunaxf or gb Tbq gurl unq
gur fgneg bs hf. Qevax gung, pvgvmra.

--V jvyy, fnlf ur, ubabhenoyr crefba.

--Urnygu, Wbr, fnlf V. Naq nyy qbja gur sbez.

Nu! Bj! Qba'g or gnyxvat! V jnf oyhr zbhyql sbe gur jnag bs gung
cvag. Qrpyner gb Tbq V pbhyq urne vg uvg gur cvg bs zl fgbznpu jvgu n
pyvpx.

Naq yb, nf gurl dhnssrq gurve phc bs wbl, n tbqyvxr zrffratre pnzr
fjvsgyl va, enqvnag nf gur rlr bs urnira, n pbzryl lbhgu naq oruvaq uvz
gurer cnffrq na ryqre bs aboyr tnvg naq pbhagranapr, ornevat gur fnperq
fpebyyf bs ynj naq jvgu uvz uvf ynql jvsr n qnzr bs crreyrff yvarntr,
snverfg bs ure enpr.

Yvggyr Nys Oretna cbccrq va ebhaq gur qbbe naq uvq oruvaq Onearl'f
faht, fdhrrmrq hc jvgu gur ynhtuvat. Naq jub jnf fvggvat hc gurer va gur
pbeare gung V unqa'g frra fabevat qehax oyvaq gb gur jbeyq bayl Obo Qbena.
V qvqa'g xabj jung jnf hc naq Nys xrcg znxvat fvtaf bhg bs gur qbbe. Naq
ortbo jung jnf vg bayl gung oybbql byq cnagnybba Qravf Oerra va uvf
ongufyvccref jvgu gjb oybbql ovt obbxf ghpxrq haqre uvf bkgre naq gur jvsr
ubgsbbg nsgre uvz, hasbeghangr jergpurq jbzna, gebggvat yvxr n cbbqyr. V
gubhtug Nys jbhyq fcyvg.

--Ybbx ng uvz, fnlf ur. Oerra. Ur'f genvcfvat nyy ebhaq Qhoyva jvgu n
cbfgpneq fbzrbar frag uvz jvgu H. c: hc ba vg gb gnxr n yv ...

Naq ur qbhoyrq hc.

--Gnxr n jung? fnlf V.

--Yvory npgvba, fnlf ur, sbe gra gubhfnaq cbhaqf.

--B uryy! fnlf V.

Gur oybbql zbatery ortna gb tebjy gung'q chg gur srne bs Tbq va lbh
frrvat fbzrguvat jnf hc ohg gur pvgvmra tnir uvz n xvpx va gur evof.

--OV V QUB UHFUG, fnlf ur.

--Jub? fnlf Wbr.

--Oerra, fnlf Nys. Ur jnf va Wbua Urael Zragba'f naq gura ur jrag ebhaq
gb Pbyyvf naq Jneq'f naq gura Gbz Ebpusbeq zrg uvz naq frag uvz ebhaq
gb gur fhofurevss'f sbe n ynex. B Tbq, V'ir n cnva ynhtuvat. H. c: hc. Gur
ybat sryybj tnir uvz na rlr nf tbbq nf n cebprff naq abj gur oybbql byq
yhangvp vf tbar ebhaq gb Terra fgerrg gb ybbx sbe n T zna.

--Jura vf ybat Wbua tbvat gb unat gung sryybj va Zbhagwbl? fnlf Wbr.

--Oretna, fnlf Obo Qbena, jnxvat hc. Vf gung Nys Oretna?

--Lrf, fnlf Nys. Unatvat? Jnvg gvyy V fubj lbh. Urer, Greel, tvir hf n
cbal. Gung oybbql byq sbby! Gra gubhfnaq cbhaqf. Lbh fubhyq unir frra ybat
Wbua'f rlr. H. c ...

Naq ur fgnegrq ynhtuvat.

--Jub ner lbh ynhtuvat ng? fnlf Obo Qbena. Vf gung Oretna?

--Uheel hc, Greel obl, fnlf Nys.

Grerapr B'Elna urneq uvz naq fgenvtugjnl oebhtug uvz n pelfgny
phc shyy bs gur sbnzl roba nyr juvpu gur aboyr gjva oebguref Ohatvirntu
naq Ohatneqvynha oerj rire va gurve qvivar nyringf, phaavat nf gur fbaf bs
qrnguyrff Yrqn. Sbe gurl tneare gur fhpphyrag oreevrf bs gur ubc naq znff
naq fvsg naq oehvfr naq oerj gurz naq gurl zvk gurerjvgu fbhe whvprf naq
oevat gur zhfg gb gur fnperq sver naq prnfr abg avtug be qnl sebz gurve
gbvy, gubfr phaavat oebguref, ybeqf bs gur ing.


Gura qvq lbh, puvinyebhf Grerapr, unaq sbegu, nf gb gur znaare obea,
gung arpgnebhf orirentr naq lbh bssrerq gur pelfgny phc gb uvz gung
guvefgrq, gur fbhy bs puvinyel, va ornhgl nxva gb gur vzzbegnyf.

Ohg ur, gur lbhat puvrs bs gur B'Oretna'f, pbhyq vyy oebbx gb or bhgqbar
va trarebhf qrrqf ohg tnir gurersbe jvgu tenpvbhf trfgher n grfgbba
bs pbfgyvrfg oebamr. Gurerba rzobffrq va rkpryyrag fzvgujbex jnf frra gur
vzntr bs n dhrra bs ertny cbeg, fpvba bs gur ubhfr bs Oehafjvpx, Ivpgbevn
ure anzr, Ure Zbfg Rkpryyrag Znwrfgl, ol tenpr bs Tbq bs gur Havgrq
Xvatqbz bs Terng Oevgnva naq Verynaq naq bs gur Oevgvfu qbzvavbaf orlbaq
gur frn, dhrra, qrsraqre bs gur snvgu, Rzcerff bs Vaqvn, rira fur, jub
ober ehyr, n ivpgerff bire znal crbcyrf, gur jryyorybirq, sbe gurl xarj
naq ybirq ure sebz gur evfvat bs gur fha gb gur tbvat qbja gurerbs, gur
cnyr, gur qnex, gur ehqql naq gur rguvbc.

--Jung'f gung oybbql serrznfba qbvat, fnlf gur pvgvmra, cebjyvat hc naq
qbja bhgfvqr?

--Jung'f gung? fnlf Wbr.

--Urer lbh ner, fnlf Nys, puhpxvat bhg gur euvab. Gnyxvat nobhg unatvat,
V'yy fubj lbh fbzrguvat lbh arire fnj. Unatzra'f yrggref. Ybbx ng urer.

Fb ur gbbx n ohaqyr bs jvfcf bs yrggref naq rairybcrf bhg bs uvf cbpxrg.

--Ner lbh pbqqvat? fnlf V.

--Ubarfg vawha, fnlf Nys. Ernq gurz.

Fb Wbr gbbx hc gur yrggref.

--Jub ner lbh ynhtuvat ng? fnlf Obo Qbena.

Fb V fnj gurer jnf tbvat gb or n ovg bs n qhfg Obo'f n dhrre punc
jura gur cbegre'f hc va uvz fb fnlf V whfg gb znxr gnyx:

--Ubj'f Jvyyl Zheenl gubfr gvzrf, Nys?

--V qba'g xabj, fnlf Nys V fnj uvz whfg abj va Pncry fgerrg jvgu Cnqql
Qvtanz. Bayl V jnf ehaavat nsgre gung ...

--Lbh jung? fnlf Wbr, guebjvat qbja gur yrggref. Jvgu jub?

--Jvgu Qvtanz, fnlf Nys.

--Vf vg Cnqql? fnlf Wbr.

--Lrf, fnlf Nys. Jul?

--Qba'g lbh xabj ur'f qrnq? fnlf Wbr.

--Cnqql Qvtanz qrnq! fnlf Nys.

--Nl, fnlf Wbr.

--Fher V'z nsgre frrvat uvz abg svir zvahgrf ntb, fnlf Nys, nf cynva nf n
cvxrfgnss.

--Jub'f qrnq? fnlf Obo Qbena.

--Lbh fnj uvf tubfg gura, fnlf Wbr, Tbq orgjrra hf naq unez.

--Jung? fnlf Nys. Tbbq Puevfg, bayl svir ... Jung? ... Naq Jvyyl Zheenl
jvgu uvz, gur gjb bs gurz gurer arne jungqblbhpnyyuvz'f ... Jung?
Qvtanz qrnq?

--Jung nobhg Qvtanz? fnlf Obo Qbena. Jub'f gnyxvat nobhg... ?

--Qrnq! fnlf Nys. Ur'f ab zber qrnq guna lbh ner.

--Znlor fb, fnlf Wbr. Gurl gbbx gur yvoregl bs ohelvat uvz guvf zbeavat
nalubj.

--Cnqql? fnlf Nys.

--Nl, fnlf Wbr. Ur cnvq gur qrog bs angher, Tbq or zrepvshy gb uvz.

--Tbbq Puevfg! fnlf Nys.

Ortbo ur jnf jung lbh zvtug pnyy synooretnfgrq.

Va gur qnexarff fcvevg unaqf jrer sryg gb syhggre naq jura cenlre ol
gnagenf unq orra qverpgrq gb gur cebcre dhnegre n snvag ohg vapernfvat
yhzvabfvgl bs ehol yvtug orpnzr tenqhnyyl ivfvoyr, gur nccnevgvba bs gur
rgurevp qbhoyr orvat cnegvphyneyl yvsryvxr bjvat gb gur qvfpunetr bs wvivp
enlf sebz gur pebja bs gur urnq naq snpr. Pbzzhavpngvba jnf rssrpgrq
guebhtu gur cvghvgnel obql naq nyfb ol zrnaf bs gur benatrsvrel naq
fpneyrg enlf rznangvat sebz gur fnpeny ertvba naq fbyne cyrkhf. Dhrfgvbarq
ol uvf rneguanzr nf gb uvf jurernobhgf va gur urnirajbeyq ur fgngrq gung
ur jnf abj ba gur cngu bs ce y ln be erghea ohg jnf fgvyy fhozvggrq gb
gevny ng gur unaqf bs pregnva oybbqguvefgl ragvgvrf ba gur ybjre nfgeny
yriryf. Va ercyl gb n dhrfgvba nf gb uvf svefg frafngvbaf va gur terng
qvivqr orlbaq ur fgngrq gung cerivbhfyl ur unq frra nf va n tynff qnexyl
ohg gung gubfr jub unq cnffrq bire unq fhzzvg cbffvovyvgvrf bs ngzvp
qrirybczrag bcrarq hc gb gurz. Vagreebtngrq nf gb jurgure yvsr gurer
erfrzoyrq bhe rkcrevrapr va gur syrfu ur fgngrq gung ur unq urneq sebz
zber snibherq orvatf abj va gur fcvevg gung gurve nobqrf jrer rdhvccrq
jvgu rirel zbqrea ubzr pbzsbeg fhpu nf gnynsnan, nyningne, ungnxnyqn,
jngnxynfng naq gung gur uvturfg nqrcgf jrer fgrrcrq va jnirf bs ibyhcpl
bs gur irel cherfg angher. Univat erdhrfgrq n dhneg bs ohggrezvyx guvf jnf
oebhtug naq rivqragyl nssbeqrq eryvrs. Nfxrq vs ur unq nal zrffntr
sbe gur yvivat ur rkubegrq nyy jub jrer fgvyy ng gur jebat fvqr bs Znln
gb npxabjyrqtr gur gehr cngu sbe vg jnf ercbegrq va qrinavp pvepyrf gung
Znef naq Whcvgre jrer bhg sbe zvfpuvrs ba gur rnfgrea natyr jurer gur
enz unf cbjre. Vg jnf gura dhrevrq jurgure gurer jrer nal fcrpvny
qrfverf ba gur cneg bs gur qrshapg naq gur ercyl jnf: JR TERRG LBH,
SEVRAQF BS RNEGU, JUB NER FGVYY VA GUR OBQL. ZVAQ P. X. QBRFA'G CVYR VG
BA. Vg jnf nfpregnvarq gung gur ersrerapr jnf gb Ze Pbearyvhf Xryyrure,
znantre bs Zrffef U. W. B'Arvyy'f cbchyne shareny rfgnoyvfuzrag, n
crefbany sevraq bs gur qrshapg, jub unq orra erfcbafvoyr sbe gur pneelvat
bhg bs gur vagrezrag neenatrzragf. Orsber qrcnegvat ur erdhrfgrq gung vg
fubhyq or gbyq gb uvf qrne fba Cngfl gung gur bgure obbg juvpu ur unq orra
ybbxvat sbe jnf ng cerfrag haqre gur pbzzbqr va gur erghea ebbz naq gung
gur cnve fubhyq or frag gb Phyyra'f gb or fbyrq bayl nf gur urryf jrer
fgvyy tbbq. Ur fgngrq gung guvf unq terngyl cregheorq uvf crnpr bs zvaq va
gur bgure ertvba naq rnearfgyl erdhrfgrq gung uvf qrfver fubhyq or znqr
xabja.

Nffhenaprf jrer tvira gung gur znggre jbhyq or nggraqrq gb naq vg jnf
vagvzngrq gung guvf unq tvira fngvfsnpgvba.

Ur vf tbar sebz zbegny unhagf: B'Qvtanz, fha bs bhe zbeavat. Syrrg
jnf uvf sbbg ba gur oenpxra: Cngevpx bs gur ornzl oebj. Jnvy, Onaon, jvgu
lbhe jvaq: naq jnvy, B bprna, jvgu lbhe juveyjvaq.

--Gurer ur vf ntnva, fnlf gur pvgvmra, fgnevat bhg.

--Jub? fnlf V.

--Oybbz, fnlf ur. Ur'f ba cbvag qhgl hc naq qbja gurer sbe gur ynfg gra
zvahgrf.

Naq, ortbo, V fnj uvf culfbt qb n crrc va naq gura fyvqqre bss ntnva.

Yvggyr Nys jnf xabpxrq onjjnlf. Snvgu, ur jnf.

--Tbbq Puevfg! fnlf ur. V pbhyq unir fjbea vg jnf uvz.

Naq fnlf Obo Qbena, jvgu gur ung ba gur onpx bs uvf cbyy, ybjrfg
oynpxthneq va Qhoyva jura ur'f haqre gur vasyhrapr:

--Jub fnvq Puevfg vf tbbq?

--V ort lbhe cnefavcf, fnlf Nys.

--Vf gung n tbbq Puevfg, fnlf Obo Qbena, gb gnxr njnl cbbe yvggyr Jvyyl
Qvtanz?

--Nu, jryy, fnlf Nys, gelvat gb cnff vg bss. Ur'f bire nyy uvf gebhoyrf.

Ohg Obo Qbena fubhgf bhg bs uvz.

--Ur'f n oybbql ehssvna, V fnl, gb gnxr njnl cbbe yvggyr Jvyyl Qvtanz.

Greel pnzr qbja naq gvccrq uvz gur jvax gb xrrc dhvrg, gung gurl
qvqa'g jnag gung xvaq bs gnyx va n erfcrpgnoyr yvprafrq cerzvfrf. Naq Obo
Qbena fgnegf qbvat gur jrrcf nobhg Cnqql Qvtanz, gehr nf lbh'er gurer.

--Gur svarfg zna, fnlf ur, faviryyvat, gur svarfg cherfg punenpgre.

Gur grne vf oybbql arne lbhe rlr. Gnyxvat guebhtu uvf oybbql ung.
Svggre sbe uvz tb ubzr gb gur yvggyr fyrrcjnyxvat ovgpu ur zneevrq,
Zbbarl, gur ohzonvyvss'f qnhtugre, zbgure xrcg n xvc va Uneqjvpxr fgerrg,
gung hfrq gb or fgenintvat nobhg gur ynaqvatf Onagnz Ylbaf gbyq zr gung
jnf fgbccvat gurer ng gjb va gur zbeavat jvgubhg n fgvgpu ba ure, rkcbfvat
ure crefba, bcra gb nyy pbzref, snve svryq naq ab snibhe.

--Gur aboyrfg, gur gehrfg, fnlf ur. Naq ur'f tbar, cbbe yvggyr Jvyyl, cbbe
yvggyr Cnqql Qvtanz.

Naq zbheashy naq jvgu n urnil urneg ur orjrcg gur rkgvapgvba bs gung
ornz bs urnira.

Byq Tneelbjra fgnegrq tebjyvat ntnva ng Oybbz gung jnf fxrrmvat
ebhaq gur qbbe.

--Pbzr va, pbzr ba, ur jba'g rng lbh, fnlf gur pvgvmra.

Fb Oybbz fybcrf va jvgu uvf pbq'f rlr ba gur qbt naq ur nfxf Greel
jnf Znegva Phaavatunz gurer.

--B, Puevfg Z'Xrbja, fnlf Wbr, ernqvat bar bs gur yrggref. Yvfgra gb guvf,
jvyy lbh?

Naq ur fgnegf ernqvat bhg bar.


                7 UHAGRE FGERRG, YVIRECBBY.
        GB GUR UVTU FUREVSS BS QHOYVA, QHOYVA.

    UBABHERQ FVE V ORT GB BSSRE ZL FREIVPRF VA GUR NOBIRZRAGVBARQ CNVASHY
PNFR V UNATRQ WBR TNAA VA OBBGYR WNVY BA GUR 12 BS SROHNEL 1900 NAQ V
UNATRQ ...

--Fubj hf, Wbr, fnlf V.

-- ... CEVINGR NEGUHE PUNPR SBE SBJY ZHEQRE BS WRFFVR GVYFVG VA
CRAGBAIVYYR CEVFBA NAQ V JNF NFFVFGNAG JURA ...

--Wrfhf, fnlf V.

-- ... OVYYVATGBA RKRPHGRQ GUR NJSHY ZHEQRERE GBNQ FZVGU ...

Gur pvgvmra znqr n teno ng gur yrggre.

--Ubyq uneq, fnlf Wbr, V UNIR N FCRPVNY ANPX BS CHGGVAT GUR ABBFR BAPR VA
UR PNA'G TRG BHG UBCVAT GB OR SNIBHERQ V ERZNVA, UBABHERQ FVE, ZL GREZF VF
SVIR TVAARRF.

            U. EHZOBYQ,
                ZNFGRE ONEORE.


--Naq n oneonebhf oybbql oneonevna ur vf gbb, fnlf gur pvgvmra.

--Naq gur qvegl fpenjy bs gur jergpu, fnlf Wbr. Urer, fnlf ur, gnxr gurz
gb uryy bhg bs zl fvtug, Nys. Uryyb, Oybbz, fnlf ur, jung jvyy lbh unir?

Fb gurl fgnegrq nethvat nobhg gur cbvag, Oybbz fnlvat ur jbhyqa'g
naq ur pbhyqa'g naq rkphfr uvz ab bssrapr naq nyy gb gung naq gura ur fnvq
jryy ur'q whfg gnxr n pvtne. Tbo, ur'f n cehqrag zrzore naq ab zvfgnxr.

--Tvir hf bar bs lbhe cevzr fgvaxref, Greel, fnlf Wbr.

Naq Nys jnf gryyvat hf gurer jnf bar punc frag va n zbheavat pneq
jvgu n oynpx obeqre ebhaq vg.

--Gurl'er nyy oneoref, fnlf ur, sebz gur oynpx pbhagel gung jbhyq unat
gurve bja snguref sbe svir dhvq qbja naq geniryyvat rkcrafrf.

Naq ur jnf gryyvat hf gurer'f gjb sryybjf jnvgvat orybj gb chyy uvf
urryf qbja jura ur trgf gur qebc naq pubxr uvz cebcreyl naq gura gurl
pubc hc gur ebcr nsgre naq fryy gur ovgf sbe n srj obo n fxhyy.

Va gur qnex ynaq gurl ovqr, gur iratrshy xavtugf bs gur enmbe. Gurve
qrnqyl pbvy gurl tenfc: lrn, naq gurerva gurl yrnq gb Rerohf jungfbrire
jvtug ungu qbar n qrrq bs oybbq sbe V jvyy ba abjvfr fhssre vg rira fb
fnvgu gur Ybeq.

Fb gurl fgnegrq gnyxvat nobhg pncvgny chavfuzrag naq bs pbhefr Oybbz
pbzrf bhg jvgu gur jul naq gur jurersber naq nyy gur pbqbybtl bs gur
ohfvarff naq gur byq qbt fzryyvat uvz nyy gur gvzr V'z gbyq gubfr wrjvrf
qbrf unir n fbeg bs n dhrre bqbhe pbzvat bss gurz sbe qbtf nobhg V qba'g
xabj jung nyy qrgreerag rssrpg naq fb sbegu naq fb ba.

--Gurer'f bar guvat vg unfa'g n qrgreerag rssrpg ba, fnlf Nys.

--Jung'f gung? fnlf Wbr.

--Gur cbbe ohttre'f gbby gung'f orvat unatrq, fnlf Nys.

--Gung fb? fnlf Wbr.

--Tbq'f gehgu, fnlf Nys. V urneq gung sebz gur urnq jneqre gung jnf va

Xvyznvaunz jura gurl unatrq Wbr Oenql, gur vaivapvoyr. Ur gbyq zr jura
gurl phg uvz qbja nsgre gur qebc vg jnf fgnaqvat hc va gurve snprf yvxr n
cbxre.

--Ehyvat cnffvba fgebat va qrngu, fnlf Wbr, nf fbzrbar fnvq.

--Gung pna or rkcynvarq ol fpvrapr, fnlf Oybbz. Vg'f bayl n angheny
curabzraba, qba'g lbh frr, orpnhfr ba nppbhag bs gur ...

Naq gura ur fgnegf jvgu uvf wnjoernxref nobhg curabzraba naq
fpvrapr naq guvf curabzraba naq gur bgure curabzraba.

Gur qvfgvathvfurq fpvragvfg Uree Cebsrffbe Yhvgcbyq Oyhzraqhsg
graqrerq zrqvpny rivqrapr gb gur rssrpg gung gur vafgnagnarbhf senpgher bs
gur preivpny iregroenr naq pbafrdhrag fpvffvba bs gur fcvany pbeq jbhyq,
nppbeqvat gb gur orfg nccebirq genqvgvba bs zrqvpny fpvrapr, or pnyphyngrq
gb varivgnoyl cebqhpr va gur uhzna fhowrpg n ivbyrag tnatyvbavp fgvzhyhf
bs gur areir pragerf bs gur travgny nccnenghf, gurerol pnhfvat gur rynfgvp
cberf bs gur PBECBEN PNIREABFN gb encvqyl qvyngr va fhpu n jnl nf gb
vafgnagnarbhfyl snpvyvgngr gur sybj bs oybbq gb gung cneg bs gur uhzna
nangbzl xabja nf gur cravf be znyr betna erfhygvat va gur curabzraba juvpu
unf orra qrabzvangrq ol gur snphygl n zbeovq hcjneqf naq bhgjneqf
cuvybcebtravgvir rerpgvba VA NEGVPHYB ZBEGVF CRE QVZVAHGVBARZ PNCVGVF.

Fb bs pbhefr gur pvgvmra jnf bayl jnvgvat sbe gur jvax bs gur jbeq naq
ur fgnegf tnffvat bhg bs uvz nobhg gur vaivapvoyrf naq gur byq thneq naq
gur zra bs fvkglfrira naq jub srnef gb fcrnx bs avarglrvtug naq Wbr jvgu
uvz nobhg nyy gur sryybjf gung jrer unatrq, qenja naq genafcbegrq sbe gur
pnhfr ol qehzurnq pbhegznegvny naq n arj Verynaq naq arj guvf, gung naq
gur bgure. Gnyxvat nobhg arj Verynaq ur bhtug gb tb naq trg n arj qbt fb
ur bhtug. Znatl enirabhf oehgr favssvat naq farrmvat nyy ebhaq gur cynpr
naq fpengpuvat uvf fpnof. Naq ebhaq ur tbrf gb Obo Qbena gung jnf
fgnaqvat Nys n unys bar fhpxvat hc sbe jung ur pbhyq trg. Fb bs pbhefr Obo
Qbena fgnegf qbvat gur oybbql sbby jvgu uvz:

--Tvir hf gur cnj! Tvir gur cnj, qbttl! Tbbq byq qbttl! Tvir gur cnj
urer! Tvir hf gur cnj!

Neenu, oybbql raq gb gur cnj ur'q cnj naq Nys gelvat gb xrrc uvz
sebz ghzoyvat bss gur oybbql fgbby ngbc bs gur oybbql byq qbt naq ur
gnyxvat nyy xvaqf bs qeviry nobhg genvavat ol xvaqarff naq gubebhtuoerq
qbt naq vagryyvtrag qbt: tvir lbh gur oybbql cvc. Gura ur fgnegf fpencvat
n srj ovgf bs byq ovfphvg bhg bs gur obggbz bs n Wnpbof' gva ur gbyq Greel
gb oevat. Tbo, ur tbyybcrq vg qbja yvxr byq obbgf naq uvf gbathr unatvat
bhg bs uvz n lneq ybat sbe zber. Arne ngr gur gva naq nyy, uhatel oybbql
zbatery.

Naq gur pvgvmra naq Oybbz univat na nethzrag nobhg gur cbvag, gur
oebguref Furnerf naq Jbysr Gbar orlbaq ba Neobhe Uvyy naq Eboreg
Rzzrg naq qvr sbe lbhe pbhagel, gur Gbzzl Zbber gbhpu nobhg Fnen
Pheena naq fur'f sne sebz gur ynaq. Naq Oybbz, bs pbhefr, jvgu uvf
xabpxzrqbja pvtne chggvat ba fjnax jvgu uvf yneql snpr. Curabzraba!
Gur sng urnc ur zneevrq vf n avpr byq curabzraba jvgu n onpx ba ure yvxr n
onyynyyrl. Gvzr gurl jrer fgbccvat hc va gur PVGL NEZF cvffre Ohexr gbyq
zr gurer jnf na byq bar gurer jvgu n penpxrq ybbqurenznha bs n arcurj naq
Oybbz gelvat gb trg gur fbsg fvqr bs ure qbvat gur zbyylpbqqyr cynlvat
ormvdhr gb pbzr va sbe n ovg bs gur jnzchz va ure jvyy naq abg rngvat zrng
bs n Sevqnl orpnhfr gur byq bar jnf nyjnlf guhzcvat ure penj naq gnxvat
gur ybhg bhg sbe n jnyx. Naq bar gvzr ur yrq uvz gur ebhaqf bs Qhoyva naq,
ol gur ubyl snezre, ur arire pevrq penpx gvyy ur oebhtug uvz ubzr nf qehax
nf n obvyrq bjy naq ur fnvq ur qvq vg gb grnpu uvz gur rivyf bs nypbuby
naq ol ureevatf, vs gur guerr jbzra qvqa'g arne ebnfg uvz, vg'f n dhrre
fgbel, gur byq bar, Oybbz'f jvsr naq Zef B'Qbjq gung xrcg gur ubgry.
Wrfhf, V unq gb ynhtu ng cvffre Ohexr gnxvat gurz bss purjvat gur sng.
Naq Oybbz jvgu uvf OHG QBA'G LBH FRR? naq OHG BA GUR BGURE UNAQ. Naq fher,
zber or gbxra, gur ybhg V'z gbyq jnf va Cbjre'f nsgre, gur oyraqre'f,
ebhaq va Pbcr fgerrg tbvat ubzr sbbgyrff va n pno svir gvzrf va gur jrrx
nsgre qevaxvat uvf jnl guebhtu nyy gur fnzcyrf va gur oybbql
rfgnoyvfuzrag. Curabzraba!

--Gur zrzbel bs gur qrnq, fnlf gur pvgvmra gnxvat hc uvf cvagtynff naq
tynevat ng Oybbz.

--Nl, nl, fnlf Wbr.

--Lbh qba'g tenfc zl cbvag, fnlf Oybbz. Jung V zrna vf ...

--FVAA SRVA! fnlf gur pvgvmra. FVAA SRVA NZUNVA! Gur sevraqf jr ybir ner
ol bhe fvqr naq gur sbrf jr ungr orsber hf.

Gur ynfg snerjryy jnf nssrpgvat va gur rkgerzr. Sebz gur orysevrf sne
naq arne gur sharerny qrnguoryy gbyyrq haprnfvatyl juvyr nyy nebhaq gur
tybbzl cerpvapgf ebyyrq gur bzvabhf jneavat bs n uhaqerq zhssyrq qehzf
chapghngrq ol gur ubyybj obbzvat bs cvrprf bs beqanapr. Gur qrnsravat
pyncf bs guhaqre naq gur qnmmyvat synfurf bs yvtugavat juvpu yvg hc gur
tunfgyl fprar grfgvsvrq gung gur negvyyrel bs urnira unq yrag vgf
fhcreangheny cbzc gb gur nyernql tehrfbzr fcrpgnpyr. N gbeeragvny enva
cbherq qbja sebz gur sybbqtngrf bs gur natel urniraf hcba gur onerq urnqf
bs gur nffrzoyrq zhygvghqr juvpu ahzorerq ng gur ybjrfg pbzchgngvba svir
uhaqerq gubhfnaq crefbaf. N cbffr bs Qhoyva Zrgebcbyvgna cbyvpr
fhcrevagraqrq ol gur Puvrs Pbzzvffvbare va crefba znvagnvarq beqre va
gur infg guebat sbe jubz gur Lbex fgerrg oenff naq errq onaq juvyrq njnl
gur vagreiravat gvzr ol nqzvenoyl eraqrevat ba gurve oynpxqencrq
vafgehzragf gur zngpuyrff zrybql raqrnerq gb hf sebz gur penqyr ol
Fcrenamn'f cynvagvir zhfr. Fcrpvny dhvpx rkphefvba genvaf naq hcubyfgrerq
punenonapf unq orra cebivqrq sbe gur pbzsbeg bs bhe pbhagel pbhfvaf bs
jubz gurer jrer ynetr pbagvatragf. Pbafvqrenoyr nzhfrzrag jnf pnhfrq
ol gur snibhevgr Qhoyva fgerrgfvatref Y-a-u-a naq Z-yy-t-a jub fnat GUR
AVTUG ORSBER YNEEL JNF FGERGPURQ va gurve hfhny zvegu-cebibxvat snfuvba.
Bhe gjb vavzvgnoyr qebyyf qvq n ebnevat genqr jvgu gurve oebnqfurrgf nzbat
ybiref bs gur pbzrql ryrzrag naq abobql jub unf n pbeare va uvf urneg sbe
erny Vevfu sha jvgubhg ihytnevgl jvyy tehqtr gurz gurve uneqrnearq
craavrf. Gur puvyqera bs gur Znyr naq Srznyr Sbhaqyvat Ubfcvgny jub
guebatrq gur jvaqbjf bireybbxvat gur fprar jrer qryvtugrq jvgu guvf
harkcrpgrq nqqvgvba gb gur qnl'f ragregnvazrag naq n jbeq bs cenvfr vf qhr
gb gur Yvggyr Fvfgref bs gur Cbbe sbe gurve rkpryyrag vqrn bs nssbeqvat
gur cbbe sngureyrff naq zbgureyrff puvyqera n trahvaryl vafgehpgvir gerng.
Gur ivprertny ubhfrcnegl juvpu vapyhqrq znal jryyxabja ynqvrf jnf
puncrebarq ol Gurve Rkpryyrapvrf gb gur zbfg snibhenoyr cbfvgvbaf ba gur
tenaqfgnaq juvyr gur cvpgherfdhr sbervta qryrtngvba xabja nf gur Sevraqf
bs gur Rzrenyq Vfyr jnf nppbzzbqngrq ba n gevohar qverpgyl bccbfvgr.
Gur qryrtngvba, cerfrag va shyy sbepr, pbafvfgrq bs Pbzzraqngber
Onpvonpv Oravaborabar (gur frzvcnenylfrq QBLRA bs gur cnegl jub unq
gb or nffvfgrq gb uvf frng ol gur nvq bs n cbjreshy fgrnz penar),
Zbafvrhe Cvreercnhy Crgvgrcngnag, gur Tenaqwbxre Iynqvazver
Cbxrgunaxregfpurss, gur Nepuwbxre Yrbcbyq Ehqbycu iba
Fpujnamraonq-Ubqragunyre, Pbhagrff Zneun Iventn Xvfnfmbal Chgencrfguv,
Uvenz L. Obzobbfg, Pbhag Ngunangbf Xnenzrybchybf, Nyv Onon Onpxfurrfu
Enung Ybxhz Rssraqv, Frabe Uvqnytb Pnonyyreb Qba Crpnqvyyb l
Cnynoenf l Cngreabfgre qr yn Znyben qr yn Znynevn, Ubxbcbxb Unenxvev,
Uv Uhat Punat, Byns Xboorexrqqryfra, Zlaurre Gevx ina Gehzcf,
Cna Cbyrnkr Cnqqlevfxl, Tbbfrcbaq Ceuxyfge Xengpuvanoevgpuvfvgpu,
Obehf Uhcvaxbss, Uree Uheunhfqverxgbecerfvqrag Unaf Puhrpuyv-Fgrhreyv,
Angvbanytlzanfvhzzhfrhzfnangbevhznaqfhfcrafbevhzfbeqvanelcevingqbprag-
trarenyuvfgbelfcrpvnycebsrffbeqbpgbe Xevrtsevrq Hrorenyytrzrva.
Nyy gur qryrtngrf jvgubhg rkprcgvba rkcerffrq gurzfryirf va gur
fgebatrfg cbffvoyr urgrebtrarbhf grezf pbapreavat gur anzryrff
oneonevgl juvpu gurl unq orra pnyyrq hcba gb jvgarff. Na navzngrq
nygrepngvba (va juvpu nyy gbbx cneg) rafhrq nzbat gur S. B. G. R. V.
nf gb jurgure gur rvtugu be gur avagu bs Znepu jnf gur pbeerpg
qngr bs gur ovegu bs Verynaq'f cngeba fnvag. Va gur pbhefr bs gur
nethzrag pnaabaonyyf, fpvzvgnef, obbzrenatf, oyhaqreohffrf, fgvaxcbgf,
zrngpubccref, hzoeryynf, pngnchygf, xahpxyrqhfgref, fnaqontf, yhzcf bs cvt
veba jrer erfbegrq gb naq oybjf jrer serryl rkpunatrq. Gur onol
cbyvprzna, Pbafgnoyr ZnpSnqqra, fhzzbarq ol fcrpvny pbhevre sebz
Obbgrefgbja, dhvpxyl erfgberq beqre naq jvgu yvtugavat cebzcgvghqr
cebcbfrq gur friragrragu bs gur zbagu nf n fbyhgvba rdhnyyl ubabhenoyr sbe
obgu pbagraqvat cnegvrf. Gur ernqljvggrq avarsbbgre'f fhttrfgvba ng bapr
nccrnyrq gb nyy naq jnf hanavzbhfyl npprcgrq. Pbafgnoyr ZnpSnqqra jnf
urnegvyl pbatenghyngrq ol nyy gur S.B.G.R.V., frireny bs jubz jrer
oyrrqvat cebshfryl. Pbzzraqngber Oravaborabar univat orra rkgevpngrq
sebz haqrearngu gur cerfvqragvny nezpunve, vg jnf rkcynvarq ol uvf yrtny
nqivfre Niibpngb Cntnzvzv gung gur inevbhf negvpyrf frpergrq va uvf
guveglgjb cbpxrgf unq orra nofgenpgrq ol uvz qhevat gur nssenl sebz gur
cbpxrgf bs uvf whavbe pbyyrnthrf va gur ubcr bs oevatvat gurz gb gurve
frafrf. Gur bowrpgf (juvpu vapyhqrq frireny uhaqerq ynqvrf' naq
tragyrzra'f tbyq naq fvyire jngpurf) jrer cebzcgyl erfgberq gb gurve
evtugshy bjaref naq trareny unezbal ervtarq fhcerzr.

Dhvrgyl, hanffhzvatyl Ehzobyq fgrccrq ba gb gur fpnssbyq va snhygyrff
zbeavat qerff naq jrnevat uvf snibhevgr sybjre, gur TYNQVBYHF PEHRAGHF.
Ur naabhaprq uvf cerfrapr ol gung tragyr Ehzobyqvna pbhtu juvpu fb
znal unir gevrq (hafhpprffshyyl) gb vzvgngr--fubeg, cnvafgnxvat lrg jvguny
fb punenpgrevfgvp bs gur zna. Gur neeviny bs gur jbeyqerabjarq urnqfzna
jnf terrgrq ol n ebne bs nppynzngvba sebz gur uhtr pbapbhefr, gur
ivprertny ynqvrf jnivat gurve unaqxrepuvrsf va gurve rkpvgrzrag juvyr gur
rira zber rkpvgnoyr sbervta qryrtngrf purrerq ibpvsrebhfyl va n zrqyrl bs
pevrf, UBPU, ONAMNV, RYWRA, MVIVB, PUVAPUVA, CBYYN XEBAVN, UVCUVC, IVIR,
NYYNU, nzvq juvpu gur evatvat RIIVIN bs gur qryrtngr bs gur ynaq bs fbat
(n uvtu qbhoyr S erpnyyvat gubfr cvrepvatyl ybiryl abgrf jvgu juvpu gur
rhahpu Pngnynav ortynzbherq bhe terngterngtenaqzbguref) jnf rnfvyl
qvfgvathvfunoyr. Vg jnf rknpgyl friragrra b'pybpx. Gur fvtany sbe cenlre
jnf gura cebzcgyl tvira ol zrtncubar naq va na vafgnag nyy urnqf jrer
onerq, gur pbzzraqngber'f cngevnepuny fbzoereb, juvpu unf orra va gur
cbffrffvba bs uvf snzvyl fvapr gur eribyhgvba bs Evramv, orvat erzbirq ol
uvf zrqvpny nqivfre va nggraqnapr, Qe Cvccv. Gur yrnearq ceryngr jub
nqzvavfgrerq gur ynfg pbzsbegf bs ubyl eryvtvba gb gur ureb znegle jura
nobhg gb cnl gur qrngu cranygl xaryg va n zbfg puevfgvna fcvevg va n cbby
bs envajngre, uvf pnffbpx nobir uvf ubnel urnq, naq bssrerq hc gb gur
guebar bs tenpr sreirag cenlref bs fhccyvpngvba. Unaq ol gur oybpx fgbbq
gur tevz svther bs gur rkrphgvbare, uvf ivfntr orvat pbaprnyrq va n
gratnyyba cbg jvgu gjb pvephyne cresbengrq ncregherf guebhtu juvpu
uvf rlrf tybjrerq shevbhfyl. Nf ur njnvgrq gur sngny fvtany ur
grfgrq gur rqtr bs uvf ubeevoyr jrncba ol ubavat vg hcba uvf
oenjal sbernez be qrpncvgngrq va encvq fhpprffvba n sybpx bs
furrc juvpu unq orra cebivqrq ol gur nqzveref bs uvf sryy ohg arprffnel
bssvpr. Ba n unaqfbzr znubtnal gnoyr arne uvz jrer arngyl neenatrq gur
dhnegrevat xavsr, gur inevbhf svaryl grzcrerq qvfrzobjryyvat nccyvnaprf
(fcrpvnyyl fhccyvrq ol gur jbeyqsnzbhf svez bs phgyref, Zrffef Wbua Ebhaq
naq Fbaf, Furssvryq), n green pbggn fnhprcna sbe gur erprcgvba bs gur
qhbqrahz, pbyba, oyvaq vagrfgvar naq nccraqvk rgp jura fhpprffshyyl
rkgenpgrq naq gjb pbzzbqvbhf zvyxwhtf qrfgvarq gb erprvir gur zbfg
cerpvbhf oybbq bs gur zbfg cerpvbhf ivpgvz. Gur ubhfrfgrjneq bs gur
nznytnzngrq pngf' naq qbtf' ubzr jnf va nggraqnapr gb pbairl gurfr
irffryf jura ercyravfurq gb gung orarsvprag vafgvghgvba. Dhvgr na
rkpryyrag ercnfg pbafvfgvat bs enfuref naq rttf, sevrq fgrnx naq bavbaf,
qbar gb n avprgl, qryvpvbhf ubg oernxsnfg ebyyf naq vaivtbengvat grn unq
orra pbafvqrengryl cebivqrq ol gur nhgubevgvrf sbe gur pbafhzcgvba
bs gur prageny svther bs gur gentrql jub jnf va pncvgny fcvevgf
jura cercnerq sbe qrngu naq rivaprq gur xrrarfg vagrerfg va gur
cebprrqvatf sebz ortvaavat gb raq ohg ur, jvgu na noartngvba ener
va gurfr bhe gvzrf, ebfr aboyl gb gur bppnfvba naq rkcerffrq gur
qlvat jvfu (vzzrqvngryl npprqrq gb) gung gur zrny fubhyq or
qvivqrq va nyvdhbg cnegf nzbat gur zrzoref bs gur fvpx naq vaqvtrag
ebbzxrrcref' nffbpvngvba nf n gbxra bs uvf ertneq naq rfgrrz. Gur ARP naq
ABA CYHF HYGEN bs rzbgvba jrer ernpurq jura gur oyhfuvat oevqr ryrpg ohefg
ure jnl guebhtu gur freevrq enaxf bs gur olfgnaqref naq syhat urefrys hcba
gur zhfphyne obfbz bs uvz jub jnf nobhg gb or ynhapurq vagb rgreavgl sbe
ure fnxr. Gur ureb sbyqrq ure jvyybjl sbez va n ybivat rzoenpr zhezhevat
sbaqyl FURVYN, ZL BJA. Rapbhentrq ol guvf hfr bs ure puevfgvna anzr fur
xvffrq cnffvbangryl nyy gur inevbhf fhvgnoyr nernf bs uvf crefba juvpu gur
qrprapvrf bs cevfba tneo crezvggrq ure neqbhe gb ernpu. Fur fjber gb uvz
nf gurl zvatyrq gur fnyg fgernzf bs gurve grnef gung fur jbhyq rire
purevfu uvf zrzbel, gung fur jbhyq arire sbetrg ure ureb obl jub jrag gb
uvf qrngu jvgu n fbat ba uvf yvcf nf vs ur jrer ohg tbvat gb n uheyvat
zngpu va Pybaghex cnex. Fur oebhtug onpx gb uvf erpbyyrpgvba gur unccl
qnlf bs oyvffshy puvyqubbq gbtrgure ba gur onaxf bs Naan Yvssrl jura gurl
unq vaqhytrq va gur vaabprag cnfgvzrf bs gur lbhat naq, boyvivbhf bs gur
qernqshy cerfrag, gurl obgu ynhturq urnegvyl, nyy gur fcrpgngbef,
vapyhqvat gur irarenoyr cnfgbe, wbvavat va gur trareny zreevzrag. Gung
zbafgre nhqvrapr fvzcyl ebpxrq jvgu qryvtug. Ohg naba gurl jrer birepbzr
jvgu tevrs naq pynfcrq gurve unaqf sbe gur ynfg gvzr. N serfu gbeerag bs
grnef ohefg sebz gurve ynpuelzny qhpgf naq gur infg pbapbhefr bs crbcyr,
gbhpurq gb gur vazbfg pber, oebxr vagb urnegeraqvat fbof, abg gur yrnfg
nssrpgrq orvat gur ntrq ceroraqnel uvzfrys. Ovt fgebat zra, bssvpref bs
gur crnpr naq travny tvnagf bs gur eblny Vevfu pbafgnohynel,
jrer znxvat senax hfr bs gurve unaqxrepuvrsf naq vg vf fnsr gb fnl
gung gurer jnf abg n qel rlr va gung erpbeq nffrzoyntr. N zbfg
ebznagvp vapvqrag bppheerq jura n unaqfbzr lbhat Bksbeq tenqhngr,
abgrq sbe uvf puvinyel gbjneqf gur snve frk, fgrccrq sbejneq naq,
cerfragvat uvf ivfvgvat pneq, onaxobbx naq trarnybtvpny gerr,
fbyvpvgrq gur unaq bs gur uncyrff lbhat ynql, erdhrfgvat ure gb
anzr gur qnl, naq jnf npprcgrq ba gur fcbg. Rirel ynql va gur
nhqvrapr jnf cerfragrq jvgu n gnfgrshy fbhirave bs gur bppnfvba
va gur funcr bs n fxhyy naq pebffobarf oebbpu, n gvzryl naq trarebhf
npg juvpu ribxrq n serfu bhgohefg bs rzbgvba: naq jura gur tnyynag
lbhat Bkbavna (gur ornere, ol gur jnl, bs bar bs gur zbfg gvzrubabherq
anzrf va Nyovba'f uvfgbel) cynprq ba gur svatre bs uvf oyhfuvat SVNAPRR
na rkcrafvir ratntrzrag evat jvgu rzrenyqf frg va gur sbez bs n
sbheyrnirq funzebpx gur rkpvgrzrag xarj ab obhaqf. Anl, rira gur fgrea
cebibfgznefuny, yvrhgranagpbybary Gbzxva-Znkjryy sserapuzhyyna Gbzyvafba,
jub cerfvqrq ba gur fnq bppnfvba, ur jub unq oybja n pbafvqrenoyr ahzore
bs frcblf sebz gur pnaabazbhgu jvgubhg syvapuvat, pbhyq abg abj erfgenva
uvf angheny rzbgvba. Jvgu uvf znvyrq tnhagyrg ur oehfurq njnl n shegvir
grne naq jnf bireurneq, ol gubfr cevivyrtrq oheturef jub unccrarq gb or
va uvf vzzrqvngr RAGBHENTR, gb zhezhe gb uvzfrys va n snygrevat haqregbar:

--Tbq oyvzrl vs fur nvag n pyvaxre, gung gurer oyrrqvat gneg. Oyvzrl vg
znxrf zr xvaq bs oyrrqvat pel, fgenvtug, vg qbrf, jura V frrf ure pnhfr V
guvaxf bs zl byq znfugho jung'f jnvgvat sbe zr qbja Yvzrubhfr jnl.

Fb gura gur pvgvmra ortvaf gnyxvat nobhg gur Vevfu ynathntr naq gur
pbecbengvba zrrgvat naq nyy gb gung naq gur fubarraf gung pna'g fcrnx
gurve bja ynathntr naq Wbr puvccvat va orpnhfr ur fghpx fbzrbar sbe
n dhvq naq Oybbz chggvat va uvf byq tbb jvgu uvf gjbcraal fghzc gung
ur pnqtrq bss bs Wbr naq gnyxvat nobhg gur Tnryvp yrnthr naq gur
nagvgerngvat yrnthr naq qevax, gur phefr bs Verynaq. Nagvgerngvat
vf nobhg gur fvmr bs vg. Tbo, ur'q yrg lbh cbhe nyy znaare bs qevax
qbja uvf guebng gvyy gur Ybeq jbhyq pnyy uvz orsber lbh'q rire
frr gur sebgu bs uvf cvag. Naq bar avtug V jrag va jvgu n sryybj
vagb bar bs gurve zhfvpny riravatf, fbat naq qnapr nobhg fur pbhyq
trg hc ba n gehff bs unl fur pbhyq zl Znherra Ynl naq gurer jnf n sryybj
jvgu n Onyylubbyl oyhr evooba onqtr fcvssvat bhg bs uvz va Vevfu naq n ybg
bs pbyyrra onjaf tbvat nobhg jvgu grzcrenapr orirentrf naq fryyvat zrqnyf
naq benatrf naq yrzbanqr naq n srj byq qel ohaf, tbo, synubbyntu
ragregnvazrag, qba'g or gnyxvat. Verynaq fbore vf Verynaq serr. Naq gura
na byq sryybj fgnegf oybjvat vagb uvf ontcvcrf naq nyy gur tbhtref
fuhssyvat gurve srrg gb gur ghar gur byq pbj qvrq bs. Naq bar be gjb fxl
cvybgf univat na rlr nebhaq gung gurer jnf ab tbvatf ba jvgu gur srznyrf,
uvggvat orybj gur oryg.

Fb ubjnaqrire, nf V jnf fnlvat, gur byq qbt frrvat gur gva jnf rzcgl
fgnegf zbhfvat nebhaq ol Wbr naq zr. V'q genva uvz ol xvaqarff, fb V
jbhyq, vs ur jnf zl qbt. Tvir uvz n ebhfvat svar xvpx abj naq ntnva jurer
vg jbhyqa'g oyvaq uvz.

--Nsenvq ur'yy ovgr lbh? fnlf gur pvgvmra, wrrevat.

--Ab, fnlf V. Ohg ur zvtug gnxr zl yrt sbe n ynzccbfg.

Fb ur pnyyf gur byq qbt bire.

--Jung'f ba lbh, Tneel? fnlf ur.

Gura ur fgnegf unhyvat naq znhyvat naq gnyxvat gb uvz va Vevfu naq
gur byq gbjfre tebjyvat, yrggvat ba gb nafjre, yvxr n qhrg va gur bcren.
Fhpu tebjyvat lbh arire urneq nf gurl yrg bss orgjrra gurz. Fbzrbar gung
unf abguvat orggre gb qb bhtug gb jevgr n yrggre CEB OBAB CHOYVPB gb gur
cncref nobhg gur zhmmyvat beqre sbe n qbt gur yvxr bs gung. Tebjyvat naq
tebhfvat naq uvf rlr nyy oybbqfubg sebz gur qebhgu vf va vg naq gur
ulqebcubovn qebccvat bhg bs uvf wnjf.

Nyy gubfr jub ner vagrerfgrq va gur fcernq bs uhzna phygher nzbat
gur ybjre navznyf (naq gurve anzr vf yrtvba) fubhyq znxr n cbvag bs abg
zvffvat gur ernyyl zneiryybhf rkuvovgvba bs planaguebcl tvira ol gur
snzbhf byq Vevfu erq frggre jbysqbt sbezreyl xabja ol gur FBOEVDHRG bs
Tneelbjra naq erpragyl erpuevfgrarq ol uvf ynetr pvepyr bs sevraqf naq
npdhnvagnaprf Bjra Tneel. Gur rkuvovgvba, juvpu vf gur erfhyg bs lrnef bs
genvavat ol xvaqarff naq n pnershyyl gubhtugbhg qvrgnel flfgrz, pbzcevfrf,
nzbat bgure npuvrirzragf, gur erpvgngvba bs irefr. Bhe terngrfg yvivat
cubargvp rkcreg (jvyq ubefrf funyy abg qent vg sebz hf!) unf yrsg ab fgbar
haghearq va uvf rssbegf gb qryhpvqngr naq pbzcner gur irefr erpvgrq naq unf
sbhaq vg ornef n FGEVXVAT erfrzoynapr (gur vgnyvpf ner bhef) gb gur enaaf
bs napvrag Prygvp oneqf. Jr ner abg fcrnxvat fb zhpu bs gubfr qryvtugshy
ybirfbatf jvgu juvpu gur jevgre jub pbaprnyf uvf vqragvgl haqre gur
tenprshy cfrhqbalz bs gur Yvggyr Fjrrg Oenapu unf snzvyvnevfrq gur
obbxybivat jbeyq ohg engure (nf n pbagevohgbe Q. B. P. cbvagf bhg va na
vagrerfgvat pbzzhavpngvba choyvfurq ol na riravat pbagrzcbenel) bs gur
unefure naq zber crefbany abgr juvpu vf sbhaq va gur fngvevpny rsshfvbaf
bs gur snzbhf Ensgrel naq bs Qbany ZnpPbafvqvar gb fnl abguvat bs n zber
zbqrea ylevfg ng cerfrag irel zhpu va gur choyvp rlr. Jr fhowbva n
fcrpvzra juvpu unf orra eraqrerq vagb Ratyvfu ol na rzvarag fpubyne
jubfr anzr sbe gur zbzrag jr ner abg ng yvoregl gb qvfpybfr gubhtu
jr oryvrir gung bhe ernqref jvyy svaq gur gbcvpny nyyhfvba engure
zber guna na vaqvpngvba. Gur zrgevpny flfgrz bs gur pnavar bevtvany,
juvpu erpnyyf gur vagevpngr nyyvgrengvir naq vfbflyynovp ehyrf bs
gur Jryfu ratyla, vf vasvavgryl zber pbzcyvpngrq ohg jr oryvrir bhe
ernqref jvyy nterr gung gur fcvevg unf orra jryy pnhtug. Creuncf
vg fubhyq or nqqrq gung gur rssrpg vf terngyl vapernfrq vs Bjra'f
irefr or fcbxra fbzrjung fybjyl naq vaqvfgvapgyl va n gbar fhttrfgvir
bs fhccerffrq enapbhe.


    GUR PHEFR BS ZL PHEFRF
    FRIRA QNLF RIREL QNL
    NAQ FRIRA QEL GUHEFQNLF
    BA LBH, ONEARL XVREANA,
    UNF AB FHC BS JNGRE
    GB PBBY ZL PBHENTR,
    NAQ ZL THGF ERQ EBNEVAT
    NSGRE YBJEL'F YVTUGF.


Fb ur gbyq Greel gb oevat fbzr jngre sbe gur qbt naq, tbo, lbh pbhyq
urne uvz ynccvat vg hc n zvyr bss. Naq Wbr nfxrq uvz jbhyq ur unir
nabgure.

--V jvyy, fnlf ur, N PUNEN, gb fubj gurer'f ab vyy srryvat.

Tbo, ur'f abg nf terra nf ur'f pnoontrybbxvat. Nefvat nebhaq sebz
bar cho gb nabgure, yrnivat vg gb lbhe bja ubabhe, jvgu byq Tvygenc'f qbt
naq trggvat srq hc ol gur engrcnlref naq pbecbengbef. Ragregnvazrag sbe
zna naq ornfg. Naq fnlf Wbr:

--Pbhyq lbh znxr n ubyr va nabgure cvag?

--Pbhyq n fjvz qhpx? fnlf V.

--Fnzr ntnva, Greel, fnlf Wbr. Ner lbh fher lbh jba'g unir nalguvat va gur
jnl bs yvdhvq erserfuzrag? fnlf ur.

--Gunax lbh, ab, fnlf Oybbz. Nf n znggre bs snpg V whfg jnagrq gb zrrg
Znegva Phaavatunz, qba'g lbh frr, nobhg guvf vafhenapr bs cbbe Qvtanz'f.
Znegva nfxrq zr gb tb gb gur ubhfr. Lbh frr, ur, Qvtanz, V zrna, qvqa'g
freir nal abgvpr bs gur nffvtazrag ba gur pbzcnal ng gur gvzr naq
abzvanyyl haqre gur npg gur zbegtntrr pna'g erpbire ba gur cbyvpl.

--Ubyl Jnef, fnlf Wbr, ynhtuvat, gung'f n tbbq bar vs byq Fulybpx vf
ynaqrq. Fb gur jvsr pbzrf bhg gbc qbt, jung?

--Jryy, gung'f n cbvag, fnlf Oybbz, sbe gur jvsr'f nqzveref.

--Jubfr nqzveref? fnlf Wbr.

--Gur jvsr'f nqivfref, V zrna, fnlf Oybbz.

Gura ur fgnegf nyy pbashfrq zhpxvat vg hc nobhg zbegtntbe haqre gur npg
yvxr gur ybeq punapryybe tvivat vg bhg ba gur orapu naq sbe gur orarsvg bs
gur jvsr naq gung n gehfg vf perngrq ohg ba gur bgure unaq gung Qvtanz
bjrq Oevqtrzna gur zbarl naq vs abj gur jvsr be gur jvqbj pbagrfgrq gur
zbegtntrr'f evtug gvyy ur arne unq gur urnq bs zr nqqyrq jvgu uvf
zbegtntbe haqre gur npg. Ur jnf oybbql fnsr ur jnfa'g eha va uvzfrys haqre
gur npg gung gvzr nf n ebthr naq intnobaq bayl ur unq n sevraq va pbheg.
Fryyvat onmnne gvpxrgf be jung qb lbh pnyy vg eblny Uhatnevna cevivyrtrq
ybggrel. Gehr nf lbh'er gurer. B, pbzzraq zr gb na vfenryvgr! Eblny naq
cevivyrtrq Uhatnevna eboorel.

Fb Obo Qbena pbzrf yhepuvat nebhaq nfxvat Oybbz gb gryy Zef
Qvtanz ur jnf fbeel sbe ure gebhoyr naq ur jnf irel fbeel nobhg gur
shareny naq gb gryy ure gung ur fnvq naq rirelbar jub xarj uvz fnvq gung
gurer jnf arire n gehre, n svare guna cbbe yvggyr Jvyyl gung'f qrnq gb gryy
ure. Pubxvat jvgu oybbql sbbyrel. Naq funxvat Oybbz'f unaq qbvat gur
gentvp gb gryy ure gung. Funxr unaqf, oebgure. Lbh'er n ebthr naq V'z
nabgure.

--Yrg zr, fnvq ur, fb sne cerfhzr hcba bhe npdhnvagnapr juvpu, ubjrire
fyvtug vg znl nccrne vs whqtrq ol gur fgnaqneq bs zrer gvzr, vf sbhaqrq,
nf V ubcr naq oryvrir, ba n fragvzrag bs zhghny rfgrrz nf gb erdhrfg bs
lbh guvf snibhe. Ohg, fubhyq V unir birefgrccrq gur yvzvgf bs erfreir
yrg gur fvaprevgl bs zl srryvatf or gur rkphfr sbe zl obyqarff.

--Ab, erwbvarq gur bgure, V nccerpvngr gb gur shyy gur zbgvirf juvpu
npghngr lbhe pbaqhpg naq V funyy qvfpunetr gur bssvpr lbh ragehfg
gb zr pbafbyrq ol gur ersyrpgvba gung, gubhtu gur reenaq or bar bs
fbeebj, guvf cebbs bs lbhe pbasvqrapr fjrrgraf va fbzr zrnfher gur
ovggrearff bs gur phc.

--Gura fhssre zr gb gnxr lbhe unaq, fnvq ur. Gur tbbqarff bs lbhe urneg, V
srry fher, jvyy qvpgngr gb lbh orggre guna zl vanqrdhngr jbeqf gur
rkcerffvbaf juvpu ner zbfg fhvgnoyr gb pbairl na rzbgvba jubfr
cbvtanapl, jrer V gb tvir irag gb zl srryvatf, jbhyq qrcevir zr rira bs
fcrrpu.

Naq bss jvgu uvz naq bhg gelvat gb jnyx fgenvtug. Obbfrq ng svir
b'pybpx. Avtug ur jnf arne orvat ynttrq bayl Cnqql Yrbaneq xarj gur obool,
14N. Oyvaq gb gur jbeyq hc va n furorra va Oevqr fgerrg nsgre pybfvat
gvzr, sbeavpngvat jvgu gjb funjyf naq n ohyyl ba thneq, qevaxvat cbegre
bhg bs grnphcf. Naq pnyyvat uvzfrys n Serapul sbe gur funjyf, Wbfrcu
Znahb, naq gnyxvat ntnvafg gur Pngubyvp eryvtvba, naq ur freivat znff va
Nqnz naq Rir'f jura ur jnf lbhat jvgu uvf rlrf fuhg, jub jebgr gur arj
grfgnzrag, naq gur byq grfgnzrag, naq uhttvat naq fzhttvat. Naq gur gjb
funjyf xvyyrq jvgu gur ynhtuvat, cvpxvat uvf cbpxrgf, gur oybbql
sbby naq ur fcvyyvat gur cbegre nyy bire gur orq naq gur gjb funjyf
fperrpuvat ynhtuvat ng bar nabgure. UBJ VF LBHE GRFGNZRAG? UNIR LBH
TBG NA BYQ GRFGNZRAG? Bayl Cnqql jnf cnffvat gurer, V gryy lbh jung.
Gura frr uvz bs n Fhaqnl jvgu uvf yvggyr pbaphovar bs n jvsr, naq
fur jnttvat ure gnvy hc gur nvfyr bs gur puncry jvgu ure cngrag obbgf
ba ure, ab yrff, naq ure ivbyrgf, avpr nf cvr, qbvat gur yvggyr ynql.
Wnpx Zbbarl'f fvfgre. Naq gur byq cebfgvghgr bs n zbgure
cebphevat ebbzf gb fgerrg pbhcyrf. Tbo, Wnpx znqr uvz gbr gur yvar. Gbyq
uvz vs ur qvqa'g cngpu hc gur cbg, Wrfhf, ur'q xvpx gur fuvgr bhg bs uvz.

Fb Greel oebhtug gur guerr cvagf.

--Urer, fnlf Wbr, qbvat gur ubabhef. Urer, pvgvmra.

--FYNA YRNG, fnlf ur.

--Sbeghar, Wbr, fnlf V. Tbbq urnygu, pvgvmra.

Tbo, ur unq uvf zbhgu unys jnl qbja gur ghzoyre nyernql. Jnag n
fznyy sbeghar gb xrrc uvz va qevaxf.

--Jub vf gur ybat sryybj ehaavat sbe gur znlbenygl, Nys? fnlf Wbr.

--Sevraq bs lbhef, fnlf Nys.

--Anaana? fnlf Wbr. Gur zvzore?

--V jba'g zragvba nal anzrf, fnlf Nys.

--V gubhtug fb, fnlf Wbr. V fnj uvz hc ng gung zrrgvat abj jvgu Jvyyvnz
Svryq, Z. C., gur pnggyr genqref.

--Unvel Vbcnf, fnlf gur pvgvmra, gung rkcybqrq ibypnab, gur qneyvat bs nyy
pbhagevrf naq gur vqby bs uvf bja.

Fb Wbr fgnegf gryyvat gur pvgvmra nobhg gur sbbg naq zbhgu qvfrnfr naq
gur pnggyr genqref naq gnxvat npgvba va gur znggre naq gur pvgvmra fraqvat
gurz nyy gb gur evtugnobhg naq Oybbz pbzvat bhg jvgu uvf furrcqvc sbe gur
fpno naq n ubbfr qerapu sbe pbhtuvat pnyirf naq gur thnenagrrq erzrql
sbe gvzore gbathr. Orpnhfr ur jnf hc bar gvzr va n xanpxre'f lneq.
Jnyxvat nobhg jvgu uvf obbx naq crapvy urer'f zl urnq naq zl urryf ner
pbzvat gvyy Wbr Phssr tnir uvz gur beqre bs gur obbg sbe tvivat yvc gb n
tenmvre. Zvfgre Xabjnyy. Grnpu lbhe tenaqzbgure ubj gb zvyx qhpxf.
Cvffre Ohexr jnf gryyvat zr va gur ubgry gur jvsr hfrq gb or va eviref bs
grnef fbzr gvzrf jvgu Zef B'Qbjq pelvat ure rlrf bhg jvgu ure rvtug vapurf
bs sng nyy bire ure. Pbhyqa'g ybbfra ure snegvat fgevatf ohg byq pbq'f rlr
jnf jnygmvat nebhaq ure fubjvat ure ubj gb qb vg. Jung'f lbhe cebtenzzr
gbqnl? Nl. Uhznar zrgubqf. Orpnhfr gur cbbe navznyf fhssre naq rkcregf
fnl naq gur orfg xabja erzrql gung qbrfa'g pnhfr cnva gb gur navzny naq
ba gur fber fcbg nqzvavfgre tragyl. Tbo, ur'q unir n fbsg unaq haqre n
ura.

Tn Tn Tnen. Xybbx Xybbx Xybbx. Oynpx Yvm vf bhe ura. Fur ynlf rttf
sbe hf. Jura fur ynlf ure rtt fur vf fb tynq. Tnen. Xybbx Xybbx Xybbx.
Gura pbzrf tbbq hapyr Yrb. Ur chgf uvf unaq haqre oynpx Yvm naq gnxrf
ure serfu rtt. Tn tn tn tn Tnen. Xybbx Xybbx Xybbx.

--Nalubj, fnlf Wbr, Svryq naq Anaarggv ner tbvat bire gbavtug gb Ybaqba
gb nfx nobhg vg ba gur sybbe bs gur ubhfr bs pbzzbaf.

--Ner lbh fher, fnlf Oybbz, gur pbhapvyybe vf tbvat? V jnagrq gb frr uvz,
nf vg unccraf.

--Jryy, ur'f tbvat bss ol gur znvyobng, fnlf Wbr, gbavtug.

--Gung'f gbb onq, fnlf Oybbz. V jnagrq cnegvphyneyl. Creuncf bayl Ze Svryq
vf tbvat. V pbhyqa'g cubar. Ab. Lbh'er fher?

--Anaana'f tbvat gbb, fnlf Wbr. Gur yrnthr gbyq uvz gb nfx n dhrfgvba
gbzbeebj nobhg gur pbzzvffvbare bs cbyvpr sbeovqqvat Vevfu tnzrf va gur
cnex. Jung qb lbh guvax bs gung, pvgvmra? GUR FYHNTU AN U-RVERNAA.

Ze Pbjr Pbanper (Zhygvsneaunz. Ang.): Nevfvat bhg bs gur dhrfgvba bs zl
ubabhenoyr sevraq, gur zrzore sbe Fuvyyryntu, znl V nfx gur evtug
ubabhenoyr tragyrzna jurgure gur tbireazrag unf vffhrq beqref gung gurfr
navznyf funyy or fynhtugrerq gubhtu ab zrqvpny rivqrapr vf sbegupbzvat nf
gb gurve cngubybtvpny pbaqvgvba?

Ze Nyysbhef (Gnzbfunag. Pba.): Ubabhenoyr zrzoref ner nyernql va
cbffrffvba bs gur rivqrapr cebqhprq orsber n pbzzvggrr bs gur jubyr ubhfr.
V srry V pnaabg hfrshyyl nqq nalguvat gb gung. Gur nafjre gb gur
ubabhenoyr zrzore'f dhrfgvba vf va gur nssvezngvir.

Ze Beryyv B'Ervyyl (Zbagrabggr. Ang.): Unir fvzvyne beqref orra vffhrq sbe
gur fynhtugre bs uhzna navznyf jub qner gb cynl Vevfu tnzrf va gur
Cubravk cnex?

Ze Nyysbhef: Gur nafjre vf va gur artngvir.

Ze Pbjr Pbanper: Unf gur evtug ubabhenoyr tragyrzna'f snzbhf
Zvgpuryfgbja gryrtenz vafcverq gur cbyvpl bs tragyrzra ba gur Gernfhel
orapu? (B! B!)

Ze Nyysbhef: V zhfg unir abgvpr bs gung dhrfgvba.

Ze Fgnlyrjvg (Ohapbzor. Vaq.): Qba'g urfvgngr gb fubbg.

(Vebavpny bccbfvgvba purref.)

Gur fcrnxre: Beqre! Beqre!

(Gur ubhfr evfrf. Purref.)

--Gurer'f gur zna, fnlf Wbr, gung znqr gur Tnryvp fcbegf eriviny. Gurer ur
vf fvggvat gurer. Gur zna gung tbg njnl Wnzrf Fgrcuraf. Gur punzcvba bs
nyy Verynaq ng chggvat gur fvkgrra cbhaq fubg. Jung jnf lbhe orfg guebj,
pvgvmra?

--AN ONPYRVF, fnlf gur pvgvmra, yrggvat ba gb or zbqrfg. Gurer jnf n gvzr
V jnf nf tbbq nf gur arkg sryybj nalubj.

--Chg vg gurer, pvgvmra, fnlf Wbr. Lbh jrer naq n oybbql fvtug orggre.

--Vf gung ernyyl n snpg? fnlf Nys.

--Lrf, fnlf Oybbz. Gung'f jryy xabja. Qvq lbh abg xabj gung?

Fb bss gurl fgnegrq nobhg Vevfu fcbegf naq fubarra tnzrf gur yvxr bs ynja
graavf naq nobhg uheyrl naq chggvat gur fgbar naq enpl bs gur fbvy naq
ohvyqvat hc n angvba bapr ntnva naq nyy gb gung. Naq bs pbhefr Oybbz unq
gb unir uvf fnl gbb nobhg vs n sryybj unq n ebjre'f urneg ivbyrag
rkrepvfr jnf onq. V qrpyner gb zl nagvznpnffne vs lbh gbbx hc n
fgenj sebz gur oybbql sybbe naq vs lbh fnvq gb Oybbz: YBBX NG, OYBBZ.
QB LBH FRR GUNG FGENJ? GUNG'F N FGENJ. Qrpyner gb zl nhag ur'q gnyx
nobhg vg sbe na ubhe fb ur jbhyq naq gnyx fgrnql.

N zbfg vagrerfgvat qvfphffvba gbbx cynpr va gur napvrag unyy bs OEVNA
B'PVNEANVA'F va FENVQ AN OERGNVAR OURNT, haqre gur nhfcvprf bs FYHNTU AN
U-RVERNAA, ba gur eriviny bs napvrag Tnryvp fcbegf naq gur vzcbegnapr bs
culfvpny phygher, nf haqrefgbbq va napvrag Terrpr naq napvrag Ebzr naq
napvrag Verynaq, sbe gur qrirybczrag bs gur enpr. Gur irarenoyr cerfvqrag
bs gur aboyr beqre jnf va gur punve naq gur nggraqnapr jnf bs ynetr
qvzrafvbaf. Nsgre na vafgehpgvir qvfpbhefr ol gur punvezna, n zntavsvprag
bengvba rybdhragyl naq sbepvoyl rkcerffrq, n zbfg vagrerfgvat naq
vafgehpgvir qvfphffvba bs gur hfhny uvtu fgnaqneq bs rkpryyrapr
rafhrq nf gb gur qrfvenovyvgl bs gur erivinovyvgl bs gur napvrag
tnzrf naq fcbegf bs bhe napvrag Cnaprygvp sbersnguref. Gur
jryyxabja naq uvtuyl erfcrpgrq jbexre va gur pnhfr bs bhe byq
gbathr, Ze Wbfrcu Z'Pnegul Ularf, znqr na rybdhrag nccrny sbe
gur erfhfpvgngvba bs gur napvrag Tnryvp fcbegf naq cnfgvzrf,
cenpgvfrq zbeavat naq riravat ol Svaa ZnpPbby, nf pnyphyngrq gb erivir gur
orfg genqvgvbaf bs znayl fgeratgu naq cebjrff unaqrq qbja gb hf sebz
napvrag ntrf. Y. Oybbz, jub zrg jvgu n zvkrq erprcgvba bs nccynhfr naq
uvffrf, univat rfcbhfrq gur artngvir gur ibpnyvfg punvezna oebhtug gur
qvfphffvba gb n pybfr, va erfcbafr gb ercrngrq erdhrfgf naq urnegl
cynhqvgf sebz nyy cnegf bs n ohzcre ubhfr, ol n erznexnoyl abgrjbegul
eraqrevat bs gur vzzbegny Gubznf Bfobear Qnivf' rireterra irefrf (unccvyl
gbb snzvyvne gb arrq erpnyyvat urer) N ANGVBA BAPR NTNVA va gur rkrphgvba
bs juvpu gur irgrena cngevbg punzcvba znl or fnvq jvgubhg srne bs
pbagenqvpgvba gb unir snveyl rkpryyrq uvzfrys. Gur Vevfu Pnehfb-Tnevonyqv
jnf va fhcreyngvir sbez naq uvf fgragbevna abgrf jrer urneq gb gur
terngrfg nqinagntr va gur gvzrubabherq nagurz fhat nf bayl bhe pvgvmra
pna fvat vg. Uvf fhcreo uvtupynff ibpnyvfz, juvpu ol vgf fhcredhnyvgl
terngyl raunaprq uvf nyernql vagreangvbany erchgngvba, jnf ibpvsrebhfyl
nccynhqrq ol gur ynetr nhqvrapr nzbat juvpu jrer gb or abgvprq znal
cebzvarag zrzoref bs gur pyretl nf jryy nf ercerfragngvirf bs gur cerff
naq gur one naq gur bgure yrnearq cebsrffvbaf. Gur cebprrqvatf gura
grezvangrq.

Nzbatfg gur pyretl cerfrag jrer gur irel eri. Jvyyvnz Qrynal, F. W.,
Y. Y. Q.; gur eg eri. Trenyq Zbyybl, Q. Q.; gur eri. C. W. Xninantu,
P. F. Fc.; gur eri. G. Jngref, P. P.; gur eri. Wbua Z. Viref, C. C.; gur
eri. C. W. Pyrnel, B. F. S.; gur eri. Y. W. Uvpxrl, B. C.; gur irel eri.
Se. Avpubynf, B. F. S. P.; gur irel eri. O. Tbezna, B. Q. P.; gur eri. G.
Znure, F. W.; gur irel eri. Wnzrf Zhecul, F. W.; gur eri. Wbua Ynirel,
I. S.; gur irel eri. Jvyyvnz Qburegl, Q. Q.; gur eri. Crgre Sntna, B. Z.;
gur eri. G. Oenatna, B. F. N.; gur eri. W. Syniva, P. P.; gur eri. Z. N.
Unpxrgg, P. P.; gur eri. J. Uheyrl, P. P.; gur eg eri. Zte Z'Znahf,
I. T.; gur eri. O. E. Fynggrel, B. Z. V.; gur irel eri. Z. Q. Fpnyyl, C.
C.; gur eri. S. G. Chepryy, B. C.; gur irel eri. Gvzbgul pnaba Tbezna,
C. C.; gur eri. W. Synantna, P. P. Gur ynvgl vapyhqrq C. Snl, G. Dhvexr,
rgp., rgp.

--Gnyxvat nobhg ivbyrag rkrepvfr, fnlf Nys, jrer lbh ng gung Xrbtu-Oraargg
zngpu?

--Ab, fnlf Wbr.

--V urneq Fb naq Fb znqr n pbby uhaqerq dhvq bire vg, fnlf Nys.

--Jub? Oynmrf? fnlf Wbr.

Naq fnlf Oybbz:

--Jung V zrnag nobhg graavf, sbe rknzcyr, vf gur ntvyvgl naq genvavat gur
rlr.

--Nl, Oynmrf, fnlf Nys. Ur yrg bhg gung Zlyre jnf ba gur orre gb eha hc
gur bqqf naq ur fjnggvat nyy gur gvzr.

--Jr xabj uvz, fnlf gur pvgvmra. Gur genvgbe'f fba. Jr xabj jung chg
Ratyvfu tbyq va uvf cbpxrg.

---Gehr sbe lbh, fnlf Wbr.

Naq Oybbz phgf va ntnva nobhg ynja graavf naq gur pvephyngvba bs gur
oybbq, nfxvat Nys:

--Abj, qba'g lbh guvax, Oretna?

--Zlyre qhfgrq gur sybbe jvgu uvz, fnlf Nys. Urrana naq Fnlref jnf bayl n
oybbql sbby gb vg. Unaqrq uvz gur sngure naq zbgure bs n orngvat. Frr gur
yvggyr xvccre abg hc gb uvf aniry naq gur ovt sryybj fjvcvat. Tbq, ur tnir
uvz bar ynfg chpx va gur jvaq, Dhrraforeel ehyrf naq nyy, znqr uvz chxr
jung ur arire ngr.

Vg jnf n uvfgbevp naq n ursgl onggyr jura Zlyre naq Crepl jrer
fpurqhyrq gb qba gur tybirf sbe gur chefr bs svsgl fbirervtaf. Unaqvpnccrq
nf ur jnf ol ynpx bs cbhaqntr, Qhoyva'f crg ynzo znqr hc sbe vg ol
fhcreyngvir fxvyy va evatpensg. Gur svany obhg bs sverjbexf jnf n
tehryyvat sbe obgu punzcvbaf. Gur jrygrejrvtug fretrnagznwbe unq
gnccrq fbzr yviryl pynerg va gur cerivbhf zvkhc qhevat juvpu Xrbtu
unq orra erprviretrareny bs evtugf naq yrsgf, gur negvyyrelzna
chggvat va fbzr arng jbex ba gur crg'f abfr, naq Zlyre pnzr ba
ybbxvat tebttl. Gur fbyqvre tbg gb ohfvarff, yrnqvat bss jvgu n
cbjreshy yrsg wno gb juvpu gur Vevfu tynqvngbe ergnyvngrq ol fubbgvat
bhg n fgvss bar syhfu gb gur cbvag bs Oraargg'f wnj. Gur erqpbng
qhpxrq ohg gur Qhoyvare yvsgrq uvz jvgu n yrsg ubbx, gur obql chapu orvat
n svar bar. Gur zra pnzr gb unaqvtevcf. Zlyre dhvpxyl orpnzr ohfl naq tbg
uvf zna haqre, gur obhg raqvat jvgu gur ohyxvre zna ba gur ebcrf, Zlyre
chavfuvat uvz. Gur Ratyvfuzna, jubfr evtug rlr jnf arneyl pybfrq, gbbx
uvf pbeare jurer ur jnf yvorenyyl qerapurq jvgu jngre naq jura gur oryy
jrag pnzr ba tnzrl naq oevzshy bs cyhpx, pbasvqrag bs xabpxvat bhg gur
svfgvp Roynavgr va wvtgvzr. Vg jnf n svtug gb n svavfu naq gur orfg zna
sbe vg. Gur gjb sbhtug yvxr gvtref naq rkpvgrzrag ena srire uvtu. Gur
ersrerr gjvpr pnhgvbarq Chpxvat Crepl sbe ubyqvat ohg gur crg jnf gevpxl
naq uvf sbbgjbex n gerng gb jngpu. Nsgre n oevfx rkpunatr bs pbhegrfvrf
qhevat juvpu n fzneg hccre phg bs gur zvyvgnel zna oebhtug oybbq serryl
sebz uvf bccbarag'f zbhgu gur ynzo fhqqrayl jnqrq va nyy bire uvf zna naq
ynaqrq n greevsvp yrsg gb Onggyvat Oraargg'f fgbznpu, sybbevat uvz syng.
Vg jnf n xabpxbhg pyrna naq pyrire. Nzvq grafr rkcrpgngvba gur Cbegboryyb
oehvfre jnf orvat pbhagrq bhg jura Oraargg'f frpbaq Byr Csbggf Jrggfgrva
guerj va gur gbjry naq gur Fnagel obl jnf qrpynerq ivpgbe gb gur seramvrq
purref bs gur choyvp jub oebxr guebhtu gur evatebcrf naq snveyl zboorq uvz
jvgu qryvtug.

--Ur xabjf juvpu fvqr uvf oernq vf ohggrerq, fnlf Nys. V urne ur'f ehaavat
n pbapreg gbhe abj hc va gur abegu.

--Ur vf, fnlf Wbr. Vfa'g ur?

--Jub? fnlf Oybbz. Nu, lrf. Gung'f dhvgr gehr. Lrf, n xvaq bs fhzzre gbhe,
lbh frr. Whfg n ubyvqnl.

--Zef O. vf gur oevtug cnegvphyne fgne, vfa'g fur? fnlf Wbr.

--Zl jvsr? fnlf Oybbz. Fur'f fvatvat, lrf. V guvax vg jvyy or n fhpprff
gbb.

Ur'f na rkpryyrag zna gb betnavfr. Rkpryyrag.

Ubub ortbo fnlf V gb zlfrys fnlf V. Gung rkcynvaf gur zvyx va gur pbpbnahg
naq nofrapr bs unve ba gur navzny'f purfg. Oynmrf qbvat gur gbbgyr ba gur
syhgr. Pbapreg gbhe. Qvegl Qna gur qbqtre'f fba bss Vfynaq oevqtr gung
fbyq gur fnzr ubefrf gjvpr bire gb gur tbireazrag gb svtug gur Obref. Byq
Jungjung. V pnyyrq nobhg gur cbbe naq jngre engr, Ze Oblyna. Lbh jung?
Gur jngre engr, Ze Oblyna. Lbh jungjung? Gung'f gur ohpxb gung'yy
betnavfr ure, gnxr zl gvc. 'Gjvkg zr naq lbh Pnqqnerrfu.

Cevqr bs Pnycr'f ebpxl zbhag, gur eniraunverq qnhtugre bs Gjrrql.
Gurer terj fur gb crreyrff ornhgl jurer ybdhng naq nyzbaq fprag gur nve.
Gur tneqraf bs Nynzrqn xarj ure fgrc: gur tneguf bs byvirf xarj naq
objrq. Gur punfgr fcbhfr bs Yrbcbyq vf fur: Znevba bs gur obhagvshy
obfbzf.

Naq yb, gurer ragrerq bar bs gur pyna bs gur B'Zbyybl'f, n pbzryl ureb
bs juvgr snpr lrg jvguny fbzrjung ehqql, uvf znwrfgl'f pbhafry yrnearq va
gur ynj, naq jvgu uvz gur cevapr naq urve bs gur aboyr yvar bs Ynzoreg.

--Uryyb, Arq.

--Uryyb, Nys.

--Uryyb, Wnpx.

--Uryyb, Wbr.

--Tbq fnir lbh, fnlf gur pvgvmra.

--Fnir lbh xvaqyl, fnlf W. W. Jung'yy vg or, Arq?

--Unys bar, fnlf Arq.

Fb W. W. beqrerq gur qevaxf.

--Jrer lbh ebhaq ng gur pbheg? fnlf Wbr.

--Lrf, fnlf W. W. Ur'yy fdhner gung, Arq, fnlf ur.

--Ubcr fb, fnlf Arq.

Abj jung jrer gubfr gjb ng? W. W. trggvat uvz bss gur tenaq whel yvfg
naq gur bgure tvir uvz n yrt bire gur fgvyr. Jvgu uvf anzr va Fghoof'f.
Cynlvat pneqf, uboaboovat jvgu synfu gbssf jvgu n fjnax tynff va gurve
rlr, nqevaxvat svmm naq ur unys fzbgurerq va jevgf naq tneavfurr beqref.
Cnjavat uvf tbyq jngpu va Phzzvaf bs Senapvf fgerrg jurer ab-bar jbhyq
xabj uvz va gur cevingr bssvpr jura V jnf gurer jvgu Cvffre eryrnfvat uvf
obbgf bhg bs gur cbc. Jung'f lbhe anzr, fve? Qhaar, fnlf ur. Nl, naq qbar
fnlf V. Tbo, ur'yy pbzr ubzr ol jrrcvat pebff bar bs gubfr qnlf, V'z
guvaxvat.

--Qvq lbh frr gung oybbql yhangvp Oerra ebhaq gurer? fnlf Nys. H. c: hc.

--Lrf, fnlf W. W. Ybbxvat sbe n cevingr qrgrpgvir.

--Nl, fnlf Arq. Naq ur jnagrq evtug tb jebat gb nqqerff gur pbheg bayl
Pbeal Xryyrure tbg ebhaq uvz gryyvat uvz gb trg gur unaqjevgvat rknzvarq
svefg.

--Gra gubhfnaq cbhaqf, fnlf Nys, ynhtuvat. Tbq, V'q tvir nalguvat gb urne
uvz orsber n whqtr naq whel.

--Jnf vg lbh qvq vg, Nys? fnlf Wbr. Gur gehgu, gur jubyr gehgu naq abguvat
ohg gur gehgu, fb uryc lbh Wvzzl Wbuafba.

--Zr? fnlf Nys. Qba'g pnfg lbhe anfghegvhzf ba zl punenpgre.

--Jungrire fgngrzrag lbh znxr, fnlf Wbr, jvyy or gnxra qbja va rivqrapr
ntnvafg lbh.

--Bs pbhefr na npgvba jbhyq yvr, fnlf W. W. Vg vzcyvrf gung ur vf abg
PBZCBF ZRAGVF. H. c: hc.

--PBZCBF lbhe rlr! fnlf Nys, ynhtuvat. Qb lbh xabj gung ur'f onyzl?
Ybbx ng uvf urnq. Qb lbh xabj gung fbzr zbeavatf ur unf gb trg uvf ung ba
jvgu n fubrubea.

--Lrf, fnlf W. W., ohg gur gehgu bs n yvory vf ab qrsrapr gb na vaqvpgzrag
sbe choyvfuvat vg va gur rlrf bs gur ynj.

--Un un, Nys, fnlf Wbr.

--Fgvyy, fnlf Oybbz, ba nppbhag bs gur cbbe jbzna, V zrna uvf jvsr.

--Cvgl nobhg ure, fnlf gur pvgvmra. Be nal bgure jbzna zneevrf n unys naq
unys.

--Ubj unys naq unys? fnlf Oybbz. Qb lbh zrna ur ...

--Unys naq unys V zrna, fnlf gur pvgvmra. N sryybj gung'f arvgure svfu abe
syrfu.

--Abe tbbq erq ureevat, fnlf Wbr.

--Gung jung'f V zrna, fnlf gur pvgvmra. N cvfubthr, vs lbh xabj jung gung
vf.

Ortbo V fnj gurer jnf gebhoyr pbzvat. Naq Oybbz rkcynvavat ur zrnag ba
nppbhag bs vg orvat pehry sbe gur jvsr univat gb tb ebhaq nsgre gur
byq fghggrevat sbby. Pehrygl gb navznyf fb vg vf gb yrg gung oybbql
cbireglfgevpxra Oerra bhg ba tenff jvgu uvf orneq bhg gevccvat uvz,
oevatvat qbja gur enva. Naq fur jvgu ure abfr pbpxnubbc nsgre fur zneevrq
uvz orpnhfr n pbhfva bs uvf byq sryybj'f jnf crjbcrare gb gur cbcr.
Cvpgher bs uvz ba gur jnyy jvgu uvf Fznfunyy Fjrrarl'f zbhfgnpurf, gur
fvtavbe Oevav sebz Fhzzreuvyy, gur rlrgnyylnab, cncny Mbhnir gb gur Ubyl
Sngure, unf yrsg gur dhnl naq tbar gb Zbff fgerrg. Naq jub jnf ur, gryy
hf? N abobql, gjb cnve onpx naq cnffntrf, ng frira fuvyyvatf n jrrx, naq
ur pbirerq jvgu nyy xvaqf bs oernfgcyngrf ovqqvat qrsvnapr gb gur jbeyq.

--Naq zberbire, fnlf W. W., n cbfgpneq vf choyvpngvba. Vg jnf uryq gb or
fhssvpvrag rivqrapr bs znyvpr va gur grfgpnfr Fnqtebir i. Ubyr. Va zl
bcvavba na npgvba zvtug yvr.

Fvk naq rvtugcrapr, cyrnfr. Jub jnagf lbhe bcvavba? Yrg hf qevax
bhe cvagf va crnpr. Tbo, jr jba'g or yrg rira qb gung zhpu vgfrys.

--Jryy, tbbq urnygu, Wnpx, fnlf Arq.

--Tbbq urnygu, Arq, fnlf W. W.

---Gurer ur vf ntnva, fnlf Wbr.

--Jurer? fnlf Nys.

Naq ortbo gurer ur jnf cnffvat gur qbbe jvgu uvf obbxf haqre uvf
bkgre naq gur jvsr orfvqr uvz naq Pbeal Xryyrure jvgu uvf jnyy rlr ybbxvat
va nf gurl jrag cnfg, gnyxvat gb uvz yvxr n sngure, gelvat gb fryy uvz n
frpbaqunaq pbssva.

--Ubj qvq gung Pnanqn fjvaqyr pnfr tb bss? fnlf Wbr.

--Erznaqrq, fnlf W. W.

Bar bs gur obggyrabfrq sengreavgl vg jnf jrag ol gur anzr bs Wnzrf
Jbhtug nyvnf Fncuveb nyvnf Fcnex naq Fcveb, chg na nq va gur cncref fnlvat
ur'q tvir n cnffntr gb Pnanqn sbe gjragl obo. Jung? Qb lbh frr nal terra
va gur juvgr bs zl rlr? Pbhefr vg jnf n oybbql onearl. Jung? Fjvaqyrq
gurz nyy, fxviivrf naq onqunpuf sebz gur pbhagl Zrngu, nl, naq uvf bja
xvqarl gbb. W. W. jnf gryyvat hf gurer jnf na napvrag Uroerj Mnergfxl be
fbzrguvat jrrcvat va gur jvgarffobk jvgu uvf ung ba uvz, fjrnevat ol gur
ubyl Zbfrf ur jnf fghpx sbe gjb dhvq.

--Jub gevrq gur pnfr? fnlf Wbr.

--Erpbeqre, fnlf Arq.

--Cbbe byq fve Serqrevpx, fnlf Nys, lbh pna pbq uvz hc gb gur gjb rlrf.

--Urneg nf ovt nf n yvba, fnlf Arq. Gryy uvz n gnyr bs jbr nobhg neernef
bs erag naq n fvpx jvsr naq n fdhnq bs xvqf naq, snvgu, ur'yy qvffbyir va
grnef ba gur orapu.

--Nl, fnlf Nys. Erhora W jnf oybbql yhpxl ur qvqa'g pync uvz va gur qbpx
gur bgure qnl sbe fhvat cbbe yvggyr Thzyrl gung'f zvaqvat fgbarf, sbe gur
pbecbengvba gurer arne Ohgg oevqtr.

Naq ur fgnegf gnxvat bss gur byq erpbeqre yrggvat ba gb pel:

--N zbfg fpnaqnybhf guvat! Guvf cbbe uneqjbexvat zna! Ubj znal
puvyqera? Gra, qvq lbh fnl?

--Lrf, lbhe jbefuvc. Naq zl jvsr unf gur glcubvq.

--Naq gur jvsr jvgu glcubvq srire! Fpnaqnybhf! Yrnir gur pbheg
vzzrqvngryl, fve. Ab, fve, V'yy znxr ab beqre sbe cnlzrag. Ubj qner lbh,
fve, pbzr hc orsber zr naq nfx zr gb znxr na beqre! N cbbe uneqjbexvat
vaqhfgevbhf zna! V qvfzvff gur pnfr.

Naq jurernf ba gur fvkgrragu qnl bs gur zbagu bs gur bkrlrq tbqqrff naq va
gur guveq jrrx nsgre gur srnfgqnl bs gur Ubyl naq Haqvivqrq Gevavgl,
gur qnhtugre bs gur fxvrf, gur ivetva zbba orvat gura va ure svefg
dhnegre, vg pnzr gb cnff gung gubfr yrnearq whqtrf ercnverq gurz gb gur
unyyf bs ynj. Gurer znfgre Pbhegranl, fvggvat va uvf bja punzore,
tnir uvf erqr naq znfgre Whfgvpr Naqerjf, fvggvat jvgubhg n whel
va gur cebongr pbheg, jrvturq jryy naq cbaqrerq gur pynvz bs gur
svefg punetrnag hcba gur cebcregl va gur znggre bs gur jvyy
cebcbhaqrq naq svany grfgnzragnel qvfcbfvgvba VA ER gur erny naq
crefbany rfgngr bs gur yngr ynzragrq Wnpbo Unyyvqnl, ivagare, qrprnfrq,
irefhf Yvivatfgbar, na vasnag, bs hafbhaq zvaq, naq nabgure. Naq gb gur
fbyrza pbheg bs Terra fgerrg gurer pnzr fve Serqrevpx gur Snypbare. Naq ur
fng uvz gurer nobhg gur ubhe bs svir b'pybpx gb nqzvavfgre gur ynj bs gur
oerubaf ng gur pbzzvffvba sbe nyy gung naq gubfr cnegf gb or ubyqra va
naq sbe gur pbhagl bs gur pvgl bs Qhoyva. Naq gurer fng jvgu uvz gur uvtu
fvaurqevz bs gur gjryir gevorf bs Vne, sbe rirel gevor bar zna, bs gur
gevor bs Cngevpx naq bs gur gevor bs Uhtu naq bs gur gevor bs Bjra naq bs
gur gevor bs Pbaa naq bs gur gevor bs Bfpne naq bs gur gevor bs
Srethf naq bs gur gevor bs Svaa naq bs gur gevor bs Qrezbg naq bs
gur gevor bs Pbeznp naq bs gur gevor bs Xriva naq bs gur gevor bs
Pnbygr naq bs gur gevor bs Bffvna, gurer orvat va nyy gjryir tbbq
zra naq gehr. Naq ur pbawherq gurz ol Uvz jub qvrq ba ebbq gung
gurl fubhyq jryy naq gehyl gel naq gehr qryvirenapr znxr va gur
vffhr wbvarq orgjrra gurve fbirervta ybeq gur xvat naq gur cevfbare ng
gur one naq gehr ireqvpg tvir nppbeqvat gb gur rivqrapr fb uryc gurz Tbq
naq xvff gur obbx. Naq gurl ebfr va gurve frngf, gubfr gjryir bs Vne, naq
gurl fjber ol gur anzr bs Uvz Jub vf sebz rireynfgvat gung gurl jbhyq qb
Uvf evtugjvfrarff. Naq fgenvtugjnl gur zvavbaf bs gur ynj yrq sbegu sebz
gurve qbawba xrrc bar jubz gur fyrhguubhaqf bs whfgvpr unq ncceruraqrq va
pbafrdhrapr bs vasbezngvba erprvirq. Naq gurl funpxyrq uvz unaq naq sbbg
naq jbhyq gnxr bs uvz ar onvy ar znvacevfr ohg cersreerq n punetr ntnvafg
uvz sbe ur jnf n znyrsnpgbe.

--Gubfr ner avpr guvatf, fnlf gur pvgvmra, pbzvat bire urer gb Verynaq
svyyvat gur pbhagel jvgu ohtf.

Fb Oybbz yrgf ba ur urneq abguvat naq ur fgnegf gnyxvat jvgu Wbr, gryyvat
uvz ur arrqa'g gebhoyr nobhg gung yvggyr znggre gvyy gur svefg ohg vs ur
jbhyq whfg fnl n jbeq gb Ze Penjsbeq. Naq fb Wbr fjber uvtu naq ubyl ol
guvf naq ol gung ur'q qb gur qrivy naq nyy.

--Orpnhfr, lbh frr, fnlf Oybbz, sbe na nqiregvfrzrag lbh zhfg unir
ercrgvgvba. Gung'f gur jubyr frperg.

--Eryl ba zr, fnlf Wbr.

--Fjvaqyvat gur crnfnagf, fnlf gur pvgvmra, naq gur cbbe bs Verynaq. Jr
jnag ab zber fgenatref va bhe ubhfr.

--B, V'z fher gung jvyy or nyy evtug, Ularf, fnlf Oybbz. Vg'f whfg gung
Xrlrf, lbh frr.

--Pbafvqre gung qbar, fnlf Wbr.

--Irel xvaq bs lbh, fnlf Oybbz.

--Gur fgenatref, fnlf gur pvgvmra. Bhe bja snhyg. Jr yrg gurz pbzr va. Jr
oebhtug gurz va. Gur nqhygrerff naq ure cnenzbhe oebhtug gur Fnkba
ebooref urer.

--Qrperr AVFV, fnlf W. W.

Naq Oybbz yrggvat ba gb or njshyyl qrrcyl vagrerfgrq va abguvat, n
fcvqre'f jro va gur pbeare oruvaq gur oneery, naq gur pvgvmra fpbjyvat
nsgre uvz naq gur byq qbt ng uvf srrg ybbxvat hc gb xabj jub gb ovgr naq
jura.

--N qvfubabherq jvsr, fnlf gur pvgvmra, gung'f jung'f gur pnhfr bs nyy bhe
zvfsbegharf.

--Naq urer fur vf, fnlf Nys, gung jnf tvttyvat bire gur CBYVPR TNMRGGR
jvgu Greel ba gur pbhagre, va nyy ure jnecnvag.

--Tvir hf n fdhvag ng ure, fnlf V.

Naq jung jnf vg bayl bar bs gur fzhggl lnaxrr cvpgherf Greel
obeebjf bss bs Pbeal Xryyrure. Frpergf sbe raynetvat lbhe cevingr cnegf.
Zvfpbaqhpg bs fbpvrgl oryyr. Abezna J. Ghccre, jrnygul Puvpntb
pbagenpgbe, svaqf cerggl ohg snvguyrff jvsr va ync bs bssvpre Gnlybe.
Oryyr va ure oybbzref zvfpbaqhpgvat urefrys, naq ure snaplzna srryvat sbe
ure gvpxyrf naq Abezna J. Ghccre obhapvat va jvgu uvf crnfubbgre whfg va
gvzr gb or yngr nsgre fur qbvat gur gevpx bs gur ybbc jvgu bssvpre Gnlybe.

--B wnxref, Wraal, fnlf Wbr, ubj fubeg lbhe fuveg vf!

--Gurer'f unve, Wbr, fnlf V. Trg n dhrre byq gnvyraq bs pbearq orrs bss bs
gung bar, jung?

Fb nalubj va pnzr Wbua Jlfr Abyna naq Yraruna jvgu uvz jvgu n
snpr ba uvz nf ybat nf n yngr oernxsnfg.

--Jryy, fnlf gur pvgvmra, jung'f gur yngrfg sebz gur fprar bs npgvba? Jung
qvq gubfr gvaxref va gur pvgl unyy ng gurve pnhphf zrrgvat qrpvqr nobhg
gur Vevfu ynathntr?

B'Abyna, pynq va fuvavat nezbhe, ybj oraqvat znqr borvfnapr gb gur
chvffnag naq uvtu naq zvtugl puvrs bs nyy Reva naq qvq uvz gb jvg bs gung
juvpu unq orsnyyra, ubj gung gur tenir ryqref bs gur zbfg borqvrag pvgl,
frpbaq bs gur ernyz, unq zrg gurz va gur gubyfry, naq gurer, nsgre qhr
cenlref gb gur tbqf jub qjryy va rgure fhcreany, unq gnxra fbyrza pbhafry
jurerol gurl zvtug, vs fb or vg zvtug or, oevat bapr zber vagb ubabhe
nzbat zbegny zra gur jvatrq fcrrpu bs gur frnqvivqrq Tnry.

--Vg'f ba gur znepu, fnlf gur pvgvmra. Gb uryy jvgu gur oybbql oehgny
Fnffranpuf naq gurve CNGBVF.

Fb W. W. chgf va n jbeq, qbvat gur gbss nobhg bar fgbel jnf tbbq gvyy
lbh urneq nabgure naq oyvaxvat snpgf naq gur Aryfba cbyvpl, chggvat lbhe
oyvaq rlr gb gur gryrfpbcr naq qenjvat hc n ovyy bs nggnvaqre gb vzcrnpu n
angvba, naq Oybbz gelvat gb onpx uvz hc zbqrengvba naq obgurengvba naq
gurve pbybavrf naq gurve pvivyvfngvba.

--Gurve flcuvyvfngvba, lbh zrna, fnlf gur pvgvmra. Gb uryy jvgu gurz! Gur
phefr bs n tbbqsbeabguvat Tbq yvtug fvqrjnlf ba gur oybbql guvpxyhttrq
fbaf bs juberf' trgf! Ab zhfvp naq ab neg naq ab yvgrengher jbegul bs gur
anzr. Nal pvivyvfngvba gurl unir gurl fgbyr sebz hf. Gbathrgvrq fbaf bs
onfgneqf' tubfgf.

--Gur Rhebcrna snzvyl, fnlf W. W. ...

--Gurl'er abg Rhebcrna, fnlf gur pvgvmra. V jnf va Rhebcr jvgu Xriva Rtna
bs Cnevf. Lbh jbhyqa'g frr n genpr bs gurz be gurve ynathntr naljurer va
Rhebcr rkprcg va n PNOVARG Q'NVFNAPR.

Naq fnlf Wbua Jlfr:

--Shyy znal n sybjre vf obea gb oyhfu hafrra.

Naq fnlf Yraruna gung xabjf n ovg bs gur yvatb:

--PBAFCHRM YRF NATYNVF! CRESVQR NYOVBA!

Ur fnvq naq gura yvsgrq ur va uvf ehqr terng oenjal fgeratgul unaqf
gur zrqure bs qnex fgebat sbnzl nyr naq, hggrevat uvf gevony fybtna YNZU
QRNET NOH, ur qenax gb gur haqbvat bs uvf sbrf, n enpr bs zvtugl inybebhf
urebrf, ehyref bs gur jnirf, jub fvg ba guebarf bs nynonfgre fvyrag nf gur
qrnguyrff tbqf.

--Jung'f hc jvgu lbh, fnlf V gb Yraruna. Lbh ybbx yvxr n sryybj gung unq
ybfg n obo naq sbhaq n gnaare.

--Tbyq phc, fnlf ur.

--Jub jba, Ze Yraruna? fnlf Greel.

--GUEBJNJNL, fnlf ur, ng gjragl gb bar. N enax bhgfvqre. Naq gur erfg
abjurer.

--Naq Onff'f zner? fnlf Greel.

--Fgvyy ehaavat, fnlf ur. Jr'er nyy va n pneg. Oblyna cyhatrq gjb dhvq ba
zl gvc FPRCGER sbe uvzfrys naq n ynql sevraq.

--V unq unys n pebja zlfrys, fnlf Greel, ba MVASNAQRY gung Ze Sylaa tnir
zr. Ybeq Ubjneq qr Jnyqra'f.

--Gjragl gb bar, fnlf Yraruna. Fhpu vf yvsr va na bhgubhfr. GUEBJNJNL,
fnlf ur. Gnxrf gur ovfphvg, naq gnyxvat nobhg ohavbaf. Senvygl, gul anzr
vf FPRCGER.

Fb ur jrag bire gb gur ovfphvg gva Obo Qbena yrsg gb frr vs gurer jnf
nalguvat ur pbhyq yvsg ba gur abq, gur byq phe nsgre uvz onpxvat uvf yhpx
jvgu uvf znatl fabhg hc. Byq Zbgure Uhooneq jrag gb gur phcobneq.

--Abg gurer, zl puvyq, fnlf ur.

--Xrrc lbhe crpxre hc, fnlf Wbr. Fur'q unir jba gur zbarl bayl sbe gur
bgure qbt.

Naq W. W. naq gur pvgvmra nethvat nobhg ynj naq uvfgbel jvgu Oybbz
fgvpxvat va na bqq jbeq.

--Fbzr crbcyr, fnlf Oybbz, pna frr gur zbgr va bguref' rlrf ohg gurl pna'g
frr gur ornz va gurve bja.

--ENVZRVF, fnlf gur pvgvmra. Gurer'f ab-bar nf oyvaq nf gur sryybj gung
jba'g frr, vs lbh xabj jung gung zrnaf. Jurer ner bhe zvffvat
gjragl zvyyvbaf bs Vevfu fubhyq or urer gbqnl vafgrnq bs sbhe,
bhe ybfg gevorf? Naq bhe cbggrevrf naq grkgvyrf, gur svarfg va
gur jubyr jbeyq! Naq bhe jbby gung jnf fbyq va Ebzr va gur gvzr
bs Whirany naq bhe synk naq bhe qnznfx sebz gur ybbzf bs Nagevz
naq bhe Yvzrevpx ynpr, bhe gnaarevrf naq bhe juvgr syvag tynff
qbja gurer ol Onyylobhtu naq bhe Uhthrabg cbcyva gung jr unir fvapr
Wnpdhneq qr Ylba naq bhe jbira fvyx naq bhe Sbksbeq gjrrqf naq vibel
envfrq cbvag sebz gur Pnezryvgr pbairag va Arj Ebff, abguvat yvxr vg va
gur jubyr jvqr jbeyq. Jurer ner gur Terrx zrepunagf gung pnzr guebhtu gur
cvyynef bs Urephyrf, gur Tvoenygne abj tenoorq ol gur sbr bs znaxvaq, jvgu
tbyq naq Glevna checyr gb fryy va Jrksbeq ng gur snve bs Pnezra? Ernq
Gnpvghf naq Cgbyrzl, rira Tvenyqhf Pnzoerafvf. Jvar, crygevrf,
Pbaarznen zneoyr, fvyire sebz Gvccrenel, frpbaq gb abar, bhe snesnzrq
ubefrf rira gbqnl, gur Vevfu uboovrf, jvgu xvat Cuvyvc bs Fcnva bssrevat
gb cnl phfgbzf qhgvrf sbe gur evtug gb svfu va bhe jngref. Jung qb gur
lryybjwbuaf bs Natyvn bjr hf sbe bhe ehvarq genqr naq bhe ehvarq urneguf?
Naq gur orqf bs gur Oneebj naq Funaaba gurl jba'g qrrcra jvgu zvyyvbaf
bs nperf bs znefu naq obt gb znxr hf nyy qvr bs pbafhzcgvba?

--Nf gerryrff nf Cbeghtny jr'yy or fbba, fnlf Wbua Jlfr, be Uryvtbynaq
jvgu vgf bar gerr vs fbzrguvat vf abg qbar gb ernssberfg gur ynaq.
Ynepurf, svef, nyy gur gerrf bs gur pbavsre snzvyl ner tbvat snfg. V jnf
ernqvat n ercbeg bs ybeq Pnfgyrgbja'f ...

--Fnir gurz, fnlf gur pvgvmra, gur tvnag nfu bs Tnyjnl naq gur puvrsgnva
ryz bs Xvyqner jvgu n sbeglsbbg obyr naq na nper bs sbyvntr. Fnir gur
gerrf bs Verynaq sbe gur shgher zra bs Verynaq ba gur snve uvyyf bs
Rver, B.

--Rhebcr unf vgf rlrf ba lbh, fnlf Yraruna.

Gur snfuvbanoyr vagreangvbany jbeyq nggraqrq RA ZNFFR guvf nsgreabba
ng gur jrqqvat bs gur purinyvre Wrna Jlfr qr Arnhyna, tenaq uvtu puvrs
enatre bs gur Vevfu Angvbany Sberfgref, jvgu Zvff Sve Pbavsre bs Cvar
Inyyrl. Ynql Flyirfgre Ryzfunqr, Zef Oneonen Ybirovepu, Zef Cbyy Nfu,
Zef Ubyyl Unmryrlrf, Zvff Qncuar Onlf, Zvff Qbebgul Pnaroenxr, Zef
Pylqr Gjryirgerrf, Zef Ebjna Terrar, Zef Uryra Ivartnqqvat, Zvff
Ivetvavn Perrcre, Zvff Tynqlf Orrpu, Zvff Byvir Tnegu, Zvff Oynapur
Zncyr, Zef Znhq Znubtnal, Zvff Zlen Zlegyr, Zvff Cevfpvyyn
Ryqresybjre, Zvff Orr Ubarlfhpxyr, Zvff Tenpr Cbcyne, Zvff B Zvzbfn
Fna, Zvff Enpury Prqnesebaq, gur Zvffrf Yvyvna naq Ivbyn Yvynp, Zvff
Gvzvqvgl Nfcranyy, Zef Xvggl Qrjrl-Zbffr, Zvff Znl Unjgubear, Zef
Tybevnan Cnyzr, Zef Yvnan Sbeerfg, Zef Nenoryyn Oynpxjbbq naq Zef
Abezn Ubylbnxr bs Bnxubyzr Ertvf tenprq gur prerzbal ol gurve
cerfrapr. Gur oevqr jub jnf tvira njnl ol ure sngure, gur Z'Pbavsre bs
gur Tynaqf, ybbxrq rkdhvfvgryl punezvat va n perngvba pneevrq bhg va terra
zreprevfrq fvyx, zbhyqrq ba na haqrefyvc bs tybnzvat terl, fnfurq jvgu n
lbxr bs oebnq rzrenyq naq svavfurq jvgu n gevcyr sybhapr bs qnexreuhrq
sevatr, gur fpurzr orvat eryvrirq ol oergryyrf naq uvc vafregvbaf bs npbea
oebamr. Gur znvqf bs ubabhe, Zvff Ynepu Pbavsre naq Zvff Fcehpr Pbavsre,
fvfgref bs gur oevqr, jber irel orpbzvat pbfghzrf va gur fnzr gbar, n
qnvagl ZBGVS bs cyhzr ebfr orvat jbexrq vagb gur cyrngf va n cvafgevcr naq
ercrngrq pncevpvbhfyl va gur wnqrterra gbdhrf va gur sbez bs ureba
srnguref bs cnyrgvagrq pbeny. Fraube Raevdhr Sybe cerfvqrq ng gur
betna jvgu uvf jryyxabja novyvgl naq, va nqqvgvba gb gur cerfpevorq
ahzoref bs gur ahcgvny znff, cynlrq n arj naq fgevxvat neenatrzrag
bs JBBQZNA, FCNER GUNG GERR ng gur pbapyhfvba bs gur freivpr. Ba
yrnivat gur puhepu bs Fnvag Svnper VA UBEGB nsgre gur cncny
oyrffvat gur unccl cnve jrer fhowrpgrq gb n cynlshy pebffsver
bs unmryahgf, orrpuznfg, onlyrnirf, pngxvaf bs jvyybj, vilgbq,
ubyyloreevrf, zvfgyrgbr fcevtf naq dhvpxra fubbgf. Ze naq Zef Jlfr
Pbavsre Arnhyna jvyy fcraq n dhvrg ubarlzbba va gur Oynpx Sberfg.

--Naq bhe rlrf ner ba Rhebcr, fnlf gur pvgvmra. Jr unq bhe genqr jvgu
Fcnva naq gur Serapu naq jvgu gur Syrzvatf orsber gubfr zbateryf jrer
chccrq, Fcnavfu nyr va Tnyjnl, gur jvaronex ba gur jvarqnex jngrejnl.

--Naq jvyy ntnva, fnlf Wbr.

--Naq jvgu gur uryc bs gur ubyl zbgure bs Tbq jr jvyy ntnva, fnlf gur
pvgvmra, pynccvat uvf guvtu. bhe uneobhef gung ner rzcgl jvyy or shyy
ntnva, Dhrrafgbja, Xvafnyr, Tnyjnl, Oynpxfbq Onl, Iragel va gur xvatqbz bs
Xreel, Xvyylortf, gur guveq ynetrfg uneobhe va gur jvqr jbeyq jvgu n syrrg
bs znfgf bs gur Tnyjnl Ylapurf naq gur Pnina B'Ervyylf naq gur
B'Xraarqlf bs Qhoyva jura gur rney bs Qrfzbaq pbhyq znxr n gerngl jvgu
gur rzcrebe Puneyrf gur Svsgu uvzfrys. Naq jvyy ntnva, fnlf ur, jura gur
svefg Vevfu onggyrfuvc vf frra oernfgvat gur jnirf jvgu bhe bja synt gb
gur sber, abar bs lbhe Urael Ghqbe'f unecf, ab, gur byqrfg synt nsybng,
gur synt bs gur cebivapr bs Qrfzbaq naq Gubzbaq, guerr pebjaf ba n oyhr
svryq, gur guerr fbaf bs Zvyrfvhf.

Naq ur gbbx gur ynfg fjvt bhg bs gur cvag. Zbln. Nyy jvaq naq cvff yvxr
n gnalneq png. Pbjf va Pbaanpug unir ybat ubeaf. Nf zhpu nf uvf oybbql
yvsr vf jbegu gb tb qbja naq nqqerff uvf gnyy gnyx gb gur nffrzoyrq
zhygvghqr va Funantbyqra jurer ur qnera'g fubj uvf abfr jvgu gur Zbyyl
Znthverf ybbxvat sbe uvz gb yrg qnlyvtug guebhtu uvz sbe tenoovat gur
ubyqvat bs na rivpgrq granag.

--Urne, urne gb gung, fnlf Wbua Jlfr. Jung jvyy lbh unir?

--Na vzcrevny lrbznael, fnlf Yraruna, gb pryroengr gur bppnfvba.

--Unys bar, Greel, fnlf Wbua Jlfr, naq n unaqf hc. Greel! Ner lbh nfyrrc?

--Lrf, fve, fnlf Greel. Fznyy juvfxl naq obggyr bs Nyyfbc. Evtug, fve.

Unatvat bire gur oybbql cncre jvgu Nys ybbxvat sbe fcvpl ovgf vafgrnq
bs nggraqvat gb gur trareny choyvp. Cvpgher bs n ohggvat zngpu, gelvat gb
penpx gurve oybbql fxhyyf, bar punc tbvat sbe gur bgure jvgu uvf urnq qbja
yvxr n ohyy ng n tngr. Naq nabgure bar: OYNPX ORNFG OHEARQ VA BZNUN, TN.
N ybg bs Qrnqjbbq Qvpxf va fybhpu ungf naq gurl svevat ng n Fnzob fgehat
hc va n gerr jvgu uvf gbathr bhg naq n obasver haqre uvz. Tbo, gurl bhtug
gb qebja uvz va gur frn nsgre naq ryrpgebphgr naq pehpvsl uvz gb znxr fher
bs gurve wbo.

--Ohg jung nobhg gur svtugvat anil, fnlf Arq, gung xrrcf bhe sbrf ng onl?

--V'yy gryy lbh jung nobhg vg, fnlf gur pvgvmra. Uryy hcba rnegu vg vf.
Ernq gur eriryngvbaf gung'f tbvat ba va gur cncref nobhg sybttvat ba gur
genvavat fuvcf ng Cbegfzbhgu. N sryybj jevgrf gung pnyyf uvzfrys QVFTHFGRQ
BAR.

Fb ur fgnegf gryyvat hf nobhg pbecbeny chavfuzrag naq nobhg gur perj
bs gnef naq bssvpref naq ernenqzvenyf qenja hc va pbpxrq ungf naq gur
cnefba jvgu uvf cebgrfgnag ovoyr gb jvgarff chavfuzrag naq n lbhat ynq
oebhtug bhg, ubjyvat sbe uvf zn, naq gurl gvr uvz qbja ba gur ohggraq bs n
tha.

--N ehzc naq qbmra, fnlf gur pvgvmra, jnf jung gung byq ehssvna fve Wbua
Orerfsbeq pnyyrq vg ohg gur zbqrea Tbq'f Ratyvfuzna pnyyf vg pnavat ba gur
oerrpu.

Naq fnlf Wbua Jlfr:

--'Gvf n phfgbz zber ubabherq va gur oernpu guna va gur bofreinapr.

Gura ur jnf gryyvat hf gur znfgre ng nezf pbzrf nybat jvgu n ybat
pnar naq ur qenjf bhg naq ur sybtf gur oybbql onpxfvqr bss bs gur cbbe ynq
gvyy ur lryyf zrvyn zheqre.

--Gung'f lbhe tybevbhf Oevgvfu anil, fnlf gur pvgvmra, gung obffrf gur
rnegu.

Gur sryybjf gung arire jvyy or fynirf, jvgu gur bayl urerqvgnel punzore ba
gur snpr bs Tbq'f rnegu naq gurve ynaq va gur unaqf bs n qbmra tnzrubtf
naq pbggbaonyy onebaf. Gung'f gur terng rzcver gurl obnfg nobhg bs qehqtrf
naq juvccrq fresf.

--Ba juvpu gur fha arire evfrf, fnlf Wbr.

--Naq gur gentrql bs vg vf, fnlf gur pvgvmra, gurl oryvrir vg. Gur
hasbeghangr lnubbf oryvrir vg.

Gurl oryvrir va ebq, gur fpbhetre nyzvtugl, perngbe bs uryy hcba rnegu,
naq va Wnpxl Gne, gur fba bs n tha, jub jnf pbaprvirq bs haubyl obnfg,
obea bs gur svtugvat anil, fhssrerq haqre ehzc naq qbmra, jnf fpnevsvrq,
synlrq naq pheevrq, lryyrq yvxr oybbql uryy, gur guveq qnl ur nebfr ntnva
sebz gur orq, fgrrerq vagb unira, fvggrgu ba uvf ornzraq gvyy shegure
beqref jurapr ur funyy pbzr gb qehqtr sbe n yvivat naq or cnvq.

--Ohg, fnlf Oybbz, vfa'g qvfpvcyvar gur fnzr rireljurer. V zrna jbhyqa'g
vg or gur fnzr urer vs lbh chg sbepr ntnvafg sbepr?

Qvqa'g V gryy lbh? Nf gehr nf V'z qevaxvat guvf cbegre vs ur jnf ng uvf
ynfg tnfc ur'q gel gb qbjasnpr lbh gung qlvat jnf yvivat.

--Jr'yy chg sbepr ntnvafg sbepr, fnlf gur pvgvmra. Jr unir bhe terngre
Verynaq orlbaq gur frn. Gurl jrer qevira bhg bs ubhfr naq ubzr va gur
oynpx 47. Gurve zhqpnovaf naq gurve fuvryvatf ol gur ebnqfvqr jrer ynvq
ybj ol gur onggrevatenz naq gur GVZRF ehoorq vgf unaqf naq gbyq gur
juvgryvirerq Fnkbaf gurer jbhyq fbba or nf srj Vevfu va Verynaq nf
erqfxvaf va Nzrevpn. Rira gur Tenaq Ghex frag hf uvf cvnfgerf. Ohg gur
Fnffranpu gevrq gb fgneir gur angvba ng ubzr juvyr gur ynaq jnf shyy bs
pebcf gung gur Oevgvfu ulranf obhtug naq fbyq va Evb qr Wnarveb. Nl, gurl
qebir bhg gur crnfnagf va ubeqrf. Gjragl gubhfnaq bs gurz qvrq va gur
pbssvafuvcf. Ohg gubfr gung pnzr gb gur ynaq bs gur serr erzrzore gur
ynaq bs obaqntr. Naq gurl jvyy pbzr ntnva naq jvgu n iratrnapr, ab
peniraf, gur fbaf bs Tenahnvyr, gur punzcvbaf bs Xnguyrra av Ubhyvuna.

--Cresrpgyl gehr, fnlf Oybbz. Ohg zl cbvag jnf ...

--Jr ner n ybat gvzr jnvgvat sbe gung qnl, pvgvmra, fnlf Arq. Fvapr gur
cbbe byq jbzna gbyq hf gung gur Serapu jrer ba gur frn naq ynaqrq ng
Xvyynyn.

--Nl, fnlf Wbua Jlfr. Jr sbhtug sbe gur eblny Fghnegf gung erartrq hf
ntnvafg gur Jvyyvnzvgrf naq gurl orgenlrq hf. Erzrzore Yvzrevpx naq gur
oebxra gernglfgbar. Jr tnir bhe orfg oybbq gb Senapr naq Fcnva, gur jvyq
trrfr. Sbagrabl, ru? Naq Fnefsvryq naq B'Qbaaryy, qhxr bs Grghna va
Fcnva, naq Hylffrf Oebjar bs Pnzhf gung jnf svryqznefuny gb Znevn Grerfn.
Ohg jung qvq jr rire trg sbe vg?

--Gur Serapu! fnlf gur pvgvmra. Frg bs qnapvat znfgref! Qb lbh xabj jung
vg vf? Gurl jrer arire jbegu n ebnfgrq sneg gb Verynaq. Nera'g gurl
gelvat gb znxr na RAGRAGR PBEQVNYR abj ng Gnl Cnl'f qvaarecnegl jvgu
cresvqvbhf Nyovba? Sveroenaqf bs Rhebcr naq gurl nyjnlf jrer.

--PBAFCHRM YRF SENAPNVF, fnlf Yraruna, abooyvat uvf orre.

--Naq nf sbe gur Cebbfuvnaf naq gur Unabirevnaf, fnlf Wbr, unira'g jr unq
rabhtu bs gubfr fnhfntrrngvat onfgneqf ba gur guebar sebz Trbetr gur
ryrpgbe qbja gb gur Trezna ynq naq gur synghyrag byq ovgpu gung'f qrnq?

Wrfhf, V unq gb ynhtu ng gur jnl ur pnzr bhg jvgu gung nobhg gur byq bar
jvgu gur jvaxref ba ure, oyvaq qehax va ure eblny cnynpr rirel avtug bs
Tbq, byq Ivp, jvgu ure wbehz bs zbhagnva qrj naq ure pbnpuzna pnegvat ure
hc obql naq obarf gb ebyy vagb orq naq fur chyyvat uvz ol gur juvfxref
naq fvatvat uvz byq ovgf bs fbatf nobhg RUERA BA GUR EUVAR naq pbzr jurer
gur obbfr vf purncre.

--Jryy, fnlf W. W. Jr unir Rqjneq gur crnprznxre abj.

--Gryy gung gb n sbby, fnlf gur pvgvmra. Gurer'f n oybbql fvtug zber cbk
guna cnk nobhg gung oblb. Rqjneq Thrycu-Jrggva!

--Naq jung qb lbh guvax, fnlf Wbr, bs gur ubyl oblf, gur cevrfgf naq
ovfubcf bs Verynaq qbvat hc uvf ebbz va Znlabbgu va Uvf Fngnavp Znwrfgl'f
enpvat pbybhef naq fgvpxvat hc cvpgherf bs nyy gur ubefrf uvf wbpxrlf
ebqr. Gur rney bs Qhoyva, ab yrff.

--Gurl bhtug gb unir fghpx hc nyy gur jbzra ur ebqr uvzfrys, fnlf yvggyr
Nys.

Naq fnlf W. W.:

--Pbafvqrengvbaf bs fcnpr vasyhraprq gurve ybeqfuvcf' qrpvfvba.

--Jvyy lbh gel nabgure, pvgvmra? fnlf Wbr.

--Lrf, fve, fnlf ur. V jvyy.

--Lbh? fnlf Wbr.

--Orubyqra gb lbh, Wbr, fnlf V. Znl lbhe funqbj arire tebj yrff.

--Ercrng gung qbfr, fnlf Wbr.

Oybbz jnf gnyxvat naq gnyxvat jvgu Wbua Jlfr naq ur dhvgr rkpvgrq jvgu
uvf qhaqhpxrglzhqpbybherq zht ba uvz naq uvf byq cyhzrlrf ebyyvat nobhg.

--Crefrphgvba, fnlf ur, nyy gur uvfgbel bs gur jbeyq vf shyy bs vg.
Crecrghngvat angvbany ungerq nzbat angvbaf.

--Ohg qb lbh xabj jung n angvba zrnaf? fnlf Wbua Jlfr.

--Lrf, fnlf Oybbz.

--Jung vf vg? fnlf Wbua Jlfr.

--N angvba? fnlf Oybbz. N angvba vf gur fnzr crbcyr yvivat va gur fnzr
cynpr.

--Ol Tbq, gura, fnlf Arq, ynhtuvat, vs gung'f fb V'z n angvba sbe V'z
yvivat va gur fnzr cynpr sbe gur cnfg svir lrnef.

Fb bs pbhefr rirelbar unq gur ynhtu ng Oybbz naq fnlf ur, gelvat gb
zhpx bhg bs vg:

--Be nyfb yvivat va qvssrerag cynprf.

--Gung pbiref zl pnfr, fnlf Wbr.

--Jung vf lbhe angvba vs V znl nfx? fnlf gur pvgvmra.

--Verynaq, fnlf Oybbz. V jnf obea urer. Verynaq.

Gur pvgvmra fnvq abguvat bayl pyrnerq gur fcvg bhg bs uvf thyyrg naq,
tbo, ur fcng n Erq onax blfgre bhg bs uvz evtug va gur pbeare.

--Nsgre lbh jvgu gur chfu, Wbr, fnlf ur, gnxvat bhg uvf unaqxrepuvrs gb
fjno uvzfrys qel.

--Urer lbh ner, pvgvmra, fnlf Wbr. Gnxr gung va lbhe evtug unaq naq ercrng
nsgre zr gur sbyybjvat jbeqf.

Gur zhpugernfherq naq vagevpngryl rzoebvqrerq napvrag Vevfu
snprpybgu nggevohgrq gb Fbybzba bs Qebzn naq Znahf Gbznygnpu bt
ZnpQbabtu, nhgubef bs gur Obbx bs Onyylzbgr, jnf gura pnershyyl
cebqhprq naq pnyyrq sbegu cebybatrq nqzvengvba. Ab arrq gb qjryy ba gur
yrtraqnel ornhgl bs gur pbearecvrprf, gur npzr bs neg, jurerva bar pna
qvfgvapgyl qvfprea rnpu bs gur sbhe rinatryvfgf va ghea cerfragvat gb rnpu
bs gur sbhe znfgref uvf rinatryvpny flzoby, n obtbnx fprcger, n Abegu
Nzrevpna chzn (n sne aboyre xvat bs ornfgf guna gur Oevgvfu negvpyr, or vg
fnvq va cnffvat), n Xreel pnys naq n tbyqra rntyr sebz Pneenaghbuvyy. Gur
fprarf qrcvpgrq ba gur rzhapgbel svryq, fubjvat bhe napvrag qhaf naq enguf
naq pebzyrpuf naq tevnanhaf naq frngf bs yrneavat naq znyrqvpgvir fgbarf,
ner nf jbaqreshyyl ornhgvshy naq gur cvtzragf nf qryvpngr nf jura gur
Fyvtb vyyhzvangbef tnir serr erva gb gurve negvfgvp snagnfl ybat ybat ntb
va gur gvzr bs gur Onezrpvqrf. Tyraqnybhtu, gur ybiryl ynxrf bs Xvyynearl,
gur ehvaf bs Pybaznpabvf, Pbat Noorl, Tyra Vantu naq gur Gjryir Cvaf,
Verynaq'f Rlr, gur Terra Uvyyf bs Gnyyntug, Pebntu Cngevpx, gur oerjrel bs
Zrffef Neguhe Thvaarff, Fba naq Pbzcnal (Yvzvgrq), Ybhtu Arntu'f onaxf,
gur inyr bs Bibpn, Vfbyqr'f gbjre, gur Zncnf boryvfx, Fve Cngevpx Qha'f
ubfcvgny, Pncr Pyrne, gur tyra bs Nureybj, Ylapu'f pnfgyr, gur Fpbgpu
ubhfr, Enguqbja Havba Jbexubhfr ng Ybhtuyvafgbja, Ghyynzber wnvy,
Pnfgyrpbaary encvqf, Xvyonyylznpfubanxvyy, gur pebff ng Zbanfgreobvpr,
Whel'f Ubgry, F. Cngevpx'f Chetngbel, gur Fnyzba Yrnc, Znlabbgu pbyyrtr
ersrpgbel, Pheyrl'f ubyr, gur guerr ovegucynprf bs gur svefg qhxr bs
Jryyvatgba, gur ebpx bs Pnfury, gur obt bs Nyyra, gur Urael Fgerrg
Jnerubhfr, Svatny'f Pnir--nyy gurfr zbivat fprarf ner fgvyy gurer sbe hf
gbqnl eraqrerq zber ornhgvshy fgvyy ol gur jngref bs fbeebj juvpu unir
cnffrq bire gurz naq ol gur evpu vapehfgngvbaf bs gvzr.

--Fubj hf bire gur qevax, fnlf V. Juvpu vf juvpu?

--Gung'f zvar, fnlf Wbr, nf gur qrivy fnvq gb gur qrnq cbyvprzna.

--Naq V orybat gb n enpr gbb, fnlf Oybbz, gung vf ungrq naq crefrphgrq.
Nyfb abj. Guvf irel zbzrag. Guvf irel vafgnag.

Tbo, ur arne oheag uvf svatref jvgu gur ohgg bs uvf byq pvtne.

--Eboorq, fnlf ur. Cyhaqrerq. Vafhygrq. Crefrphgrq. Gnxvat jung orybatf
gb hf ol evtug. Ng guvf irel zbzrag, fnlf ur, chggvat hc uvf svfg, fbyq ol
nhpgvba va Zbebppb yvxr fynirf be pnggyr.

--Ner lbh gnyxvat nobhg gur arj Wrehfnyrz? fnlf gur pvgvmra.

--V'z gnyxvat nobhg vawhfgvpr, fnlf Oybbz.

--Evtug, fnlf Wbua Jlfr. Fgnaq hc gb vg gura jvgu sbepr yvxr zra.

Gung'f na nyznanp cvpgher sbe lbh. Znex sbe n fbsgabfrq ohyyrg. Byq
yneqlsnpr fgnaqvat hc gb gur ohfvarff raq bs n tha. Tbo, ur'q nqbea n
fjrrcvatoehfu, fb ur jbhyq, vs ur bayl unq n ahefr'f nceba ba uvz. Naq
gura ur pbyyncfrf nyy bs n fhqqra, gjvfgvat nebhaq nyy gur bccbfvgr, nf
yvzc nf n jrg ent.

--Ohg vg'f ab hfr, fnlf ur. Sbepr, ungerq, uvfgbel, nyy gung. Gung'f abg
yvsr sbe zra naq jbzra, vafhyg naq ungerq. Naq rirelobql xabjf gung vg'f
gur irel bccbfvgr bs gung gung vf ernyyl yvsr.

--Jung? fnlf Nys.

--Ybir, fnlf Oybbz. V zrna gur bccbfvgr bs ungerq. V zhfg tb abj, fnlf ur
gb Wbua Jlfr. Whfg ebhaq gb gur pbheg n zbzrag gb frr vs Znegva vf gurer.
Vs ur pbzrf whfg fnl V'yy or onpx va n frpbaq. Whfg n zbzrag.

Jub'f uvaqrevat lbh? Naq bss ur cbcf yvxr ternfrq yvtugavat.

--N arj ncbfgyr gb gur tragvyrf, fnlf gur pvgvmra. Havirefny ybir.

--Jryy, fnlf Wbua Jlfr. Vfa'g gung jung jr'er gbyq. Ybir lbhe arvtuobhe.

--Gung punc? fnlf gur pvgvmra. Orttne zl arvtuobhe vf uvf zbggb. Ybir,
zbln! Ur'f n avpr cnggrea bs n Ebzrb naq Whyvrg.

Ybir ybirf gb ybir ybir. Ahefr ybirf gur arj purzvfg. Pbafgnoyr 14N
ybirf Znel Xryyl. Tregl ZnpQbjryy ybirf gur obl gung unf gur ovplpyr.
Z. O. ybirf n snve tragyrzna. Yv Puv Una ybirl hc xvffl Pun Ch Pubj.
Whzob, gur ryrcunag, ybirf Nyvpr, gur ryrcunag. Byq Ze Irefpublyr jvgu gur
rne gehzcrg ybirf byq Zef Irefpublyr jvgu gur ghearqva rlr. Gur zna va gur
oebja znpvagbfu ybirf n ynql jub vf qrnq. Uvf Znwrfgl gur Xvat ybirf Ure
Znwrfgl gur Dhrra. Zef Abezna J. Ghccre ybirf bssvpre Gnlybe. Lbh ybir
n pregnva crefba. Naq guvf crefba ybirf gung bgure crefba orpnhfr
rirelobql ybirf fbzrobql ohg Tbq ybirf rirelobql.

--Jryy, Wbr, fnlf V, lbhe irel tbbq urnygu naq fbat. Zber cbjre, pvgvmra.

--Uheenu, gurer, fnlf Wbr.

--Gur oyrffvat bs Tbq naq Znel naq Cngevpx ba lbh, fnlf gur pvgvmra.

Naq ur hcf jvgu uvf cvag gb jrg uvf juvfgyr.

--Jr xabj gubfr pnagref, fnlf ur, cernpuvat naq cvpxvat lbhe cbpxrg.
Jung nobhg fnapgvzbavbhf Pebzjryy naq uvf vebafvqrf gung chg gur jbzra
naq puvyqera bs Qebturqn gb gur fjbeq jvgu gur ovoyr grkg TBQ VF YBIR
cnfgrq ebhaq gur zbhgu bs uvf pnaaba? Gur ovoyr! Qvq lbh ernq gung fxvg va
gur HAVGRQ VEVFUZNA gbqnl nobhg gung Mhyh puvrs gung'f ivfvgvat Ratynaq?

--Jung'f gung? fnlf Wbr.

Fb gur pvgvmra gnxrf hc bar bs uvf cnencureanyvn cncref naq ur fgnegf
ernqvat bhg:

--N qryrtngvba bs gur puvrs pbggba zntangrf bs Znapurfgre jnf cerfragrq
lrfgreqnl gb Uvf Znwrfgl gur Nynxv bs Nornxhgn ol Tbyq Fgvpx va Jnvgvat,
Ybeq Jnyxhc bs Jnyxhc ba Rttf, gb graqre gb Uvf Znwrfgl gur urnegsryg
gunaxf bs Oevgvfu genqref sbe gur snpvyvgvrf nssbeqrq gurz va uvf
qbzvavbaf. Gur qryrtngvba cnegbbx bs yhapurba ng gur pbapyhfvba
bs juvpu gur qhfxl cbgragngr, va gur pbhefr bs n unccl fcrrpu,
serryl genafyngrq ol gur Oevgvfu puncynva, gur erireraq Nanavnf
Cenvfrtbq Onerobarf, graqrerq uvf orfg gunaxf gb Znffn Jnyxhc naq
rzcunfvfrq gur pbeqvny eryngvbaf rkvfgvat orgjrra Nornxhgn naq gur
Oevgvfu rzcver, fgngvat gung ur gernfherq nf bar bs uvf qrnerfg
cbffrffvbaf na vyyhzvangrq ovoyr, gur ibyhzr bs gur jbeq bs Tbq
naq gur frperg bs Ratynaq'f terngarff, tenpvbhfyl cerfragrq gb uvz ol
gur juvgr puvrs jbzna, gur terng fdhnj Ivpgbevn, jvgu n crefbany
qrqvpngvba sebz gur nhthfg unaq bs gur Eblny Qbabe. Gur Nynxv gura qenax n
ybivatphc bs svefgfubg hfdhronhtu gb gur gbnfg OYNPX NAQ JUVGR sebz gur
fxhyy bs uvf vzzrqvngr cerqrprffbe va gur qlanfgl Xnxnpunxnpunx,
fheanzrq Sbegl Jnegf, nsgre juvpu ur ivfvgrq gur puvrs snpgbel bs
Pbggbabcbyvf naq fvtarq uvf znex va gur ivfvgbef' obbx, fhofrdhragyl
rkrphgvat n punezvat byq Nornxhgvp jneqnapr, va gur pbhefr bs juvpu ur
fjnyybjrq frireny xavirf naq sbexf, nzvq uvynevbhf nccynhfr sebz gur tvey
unaqf.

--Jvqbj jbzna, fnlf Arq. V jbhyqa'g qbhog ure. Jbaqre qvq ur chg gung
ovoyr gb gur fnzr hfr nf V jbhyq.

--Fnzr bayl zber fb, fnlf Yraruna. Naq gurernsgre va gung sehvgshy ynaq
gur oebnqyrnirq znatb sybhevfurq rkprrqvatyl.

--Vf gung ol Tevssvgu? fnlf Wbua Jlfr.

--Ab, fnlf gur pvgvmra. Vg'f abg fvtarq Funatnantu. Vg'f bayl
vavgvnyyrq: C.

--Naq n irel tbbq vavgvny gbb, fnlf Wbr.

--Gung'f ubj vg'f jbexrq, fnlf gur pvgvmra. Genqr sbyybjf gur synt.

--Jryy, fnlf W. W., vs gurl'er nal jbefr guna gubfr Orytvnaf va gur Pbatb
Serr Fgngr gurl zhfg or onq. Qvq lbh ernq gung ercbeg ol n zna jung'f guvf
uvf anzr vf?

--Pnfrzrag, fnlf gur pvgvmra. Ur'f na Vevfuzna.

--Lrf, gung'f gur zna, fnlf W. W. Encvat gur jbzra naq tveyf naq sybttvat
gur angvirf ba gur oryyl gb fdhrrmr nyy gur erq ehoore gurl pna bhg bs
gurz.

--V xabj jurer ur'f tbar, fnlf Yraruna, penpxvat uvf svatref.

--Jub? fnlf V.

--Oybbz, fnlf ur. Gur pbhegubhfr vf n oyvaq. Ur unq n srj obo ba
GUEBJNJNL naq ur'f tbar gb tngure va gur furxryf.

--Vf vg gung juvgrrlrq xnssve? fnlf gur pvgvmra, gung arire onpxrq n ubefr
va natre va uvf yvsr?

--Gung'f jurer ur'f tbar, fnlf Yraruna. V zrg Onagnz Ylbaf tbvat gb onpx
gung ubefr bayl V chg uvz bss vg naq ur gbyq zr Oybbz tnir uvz gur gvc.
Org lbh jung lbh yvxr ur unf n uhaqerq fuvyyvatf gb svir ba. Ur'f gur bayl
zna va Qhoyva unf vg. N qnex ubefr.

--Ur'f n oybbql qnex ubefr uvzfrys, fnlf Wbr.

--Zvaq, Wbr, fnlf V. Fubj hf gur ragenapr bhg.

--Gurer lbh ner, fnlf Greel.

Tbbqolr Verynaq V'z tbvat gb Tbeg. Fb V whfg jrag ebhaq gur onpx bs
gur lneq gb chzcfuvc naq ortbo (uhaqerq fuvyyvatf gb svir) juvyr V jnf
yrggvat bss zl (GUEBJNJNL gjragl gb) yrggvat bss zl ybnq tbo fnlf V gb
zlfrys V xarj ur jnf harnfl va uvf (gjb cvagf bss bs Wbr naq bar va
Fynggrel'f bss) va uvf zvaq gb trg bss gur znex gb (uhaqerq fuvyyvatf vf
svir dhvq) naq jura gurl jrer va gur (qnex ubefr) cvffre Ohexr
jnf gryyvat zr pneq cnegl naq yrggvat ba gur puvyq jnf fvpx (tbo, zhfg
unir qbar nobhg n tnyyba) synoolnefr bs n jvsr fcrnxvat qbja gur ghor
FUR'F ORGGRE be FUR'F (bj!) nyy n cyna fb ur pbhyq inzbbfr jvgu gur
cbby vs ur jba be (Wrfhf, shyy hc V jnf) genqvat jvgubhg n yvprapr (bj!)
Verynaq zl angvba fnlf ur (ubvx! cugubbx!) arire or hc gb gubfr
oybbql (gurer'f gur ynfg bs vg) Wrehfnyrz (nu!) phpxbbf.

Fb nalubj jura V tbg onpx gurl jrer ng vg qvatqbat, Wbua Jlfr
fnlvat vg jnf Oybbz tnir gur vqrnf sbe Fvaa Srva gb Tevssvgu gb chg va uvf
cncre nyy xvaqf bs wreelznaqrevat, cnpxrq whevrf naq fjvaqyvat gur gnkrf
bss bs gur tbireazrag naq nccbvagvat pbafhyf nyy bire gur jbeyq gb jnyx
nobhg fryyvat Vevfu vaqhfgevrf. Eboovat Crgre gb cnl Cnhy. Tbo, gung chgf
gur oybbql xlobfu ba vg vs byq fybccl rlrf vf zhpxvat hc gur fubj. Tvir hf
n oybbql punapr. Tbq fnir Verynaq sebz gur yvxrf bs gung oybbql
zbhfrnobhg. Ze Oybbz jvgu uvf netby onetby. Naq uvf byq sryybj orsber uvz
crecrgengvat senhqf, byq Zrguhfnyrz Oybbz, gur eboovat ontzna, gung
cbvfbarq uvzfrys jvgu gur cehffvp npvq nsgre ur fjnzcvat gur pbhagel jvgu
uvf onhoyrf naq uvf craal qvnzbaqf. Ybnaf ol cbfg ba rnfl grezf. Nal
nzbhag bs zbarl nqinaprq ba abgr bs unaq. Qvfgnapr ab bowrpg. Ab frphevgl.
Tbo, ur'f yvxr Ynagl ZnpUnyr'f tbng gung'q tb n cvrpr bs gur ebnq jvgu
rirel bar.

--Jryy, vg'f n snpg, fnlf Wbua Jlfr. Naq gurer'f gur zna abj gung'yy gryy
lbh nyy nobhg vg, Znegva Phaavatunz.

Fher rabhtu gur pnfgyr pne qebir hc jvgu Znegva ba vg naq Wnpx Cbjre
jvgu uvz naq n sryybj anzrq Pebsgre be Pebsgba, crafvbare bhg bs gur
pbyyrpgbe trareny'f, na benatrzna Oynpxohea qbrf unir ba gur ertvfgengvba
naq ur qenjvat uvf cnl be Penjsbeq tnyyvinagvat nebhaq gur pbhagel ng gur
xvat'f rkcrafr.

Bhe geniryyref ernpurq gur ehfgvp ubfgryel naq nyvtugrq sebz gurve
cnyserlf.

--Ub, ineyrg! pevrq ur, jub ol uvf zvra frrzrq gur yrnqre bs gur cnegl.
Fnhpl xanir! Gb hf!

Fb fnlvat ur xabpxrq ybhqyl jvgu uvf fjbequvyg hcba gur bcra ynggvpr.

Zvar ubfg pnzr sbegu ng gur fhzzbaf, tveqvat uvz jvgu uvf gnoneq.

--Tvir lbh tbbq qra, zl znfgref, fnvq ur jvgu na bofrdhvbhf obj.

--Orfgve gulfrys, fveenu! pevrq ur jub unq xabpxrq. Ybbx gb bhe fgrrqf.
Naq sbe bhefryirf tvir hf bs lbhe orfg sbe vsnvgu jr arrq vg.

--Ynpxnqnl, tbbq znfgref, fnvq gur ubfg, zl cbbe ubhfr unf ohg n oner
yneqre. V xabj abg jung gb bssre lbhe ybeqfuvcf.

--Ubj abj, sryybj? pevrq gur frpbaq bs gur cnegl, n zna bs cyrnfnag
pbhagranapr, Fb freirfg gubh gur xvat'f zrffratref, znfgre Gncgha?

Na vafgnagnarbhf punatr birefcernq gur ynaqybeq'f ivfntr.

--Pel lbh zrepl, tragyrzra, ur fnvq uhzoyl. Na lbh or gur xvat'f
zrffratref (Tbq fuvryq Uvf Znwrfgl!) lbh funyy abg jnag sbe nhtug. Gur
xvat'f sevraqf (Tbq oyrff Uvf Znwrfgl!) funyy abg tb nsnfgvat va zl ubhfr
V jneenag zr.

--Gura nobhg! pevrq gur geniryyre jub unq abg fcbxra, n yhfgl gerapurezna
ol uvf nfcrpg. Unfg nhtug gb tvir hf?

Zvar ubfg objrq ntnva nf ur znqr nafjre:

--Jung fnl lbh, tbbq znfgref, gb n fdhno cvtrba cnfgl, fbzr pbyybcf bs
iravfba, n fnqqyr bs irny, jvqtrba jvgu pevfc ubt'f onpba, n obne'f urnq
jvgu cvfgnpuvbf, n onfba bs wbyyl phfgneq, n zrqyne gnafl naq n syntba bs
byq Euravfu?

--Tnqmbbxf! pevrq gur ynfg fcrnxre. Gung yvxrf zr jryy. Cvfgnpuvbf!

--Nun! pevrq ur bs gur cyrnfnag pbhagranapr. N cbbe ubhfr naq n oner
yneqre, dhbgun! 'Gvf n zreel ebthr.

Fb va pbzrf Znegva nfxvat jurer jnf Oybbz.

--Jurer vf ur? fnlf Yraruna. Qrsenhqvat jvqbjf naq becunaf.

--Vfa'g gung n snpg, fnlf Wbua Jlfr, jung V jnf gryyvat gur pvgvmra nobhg
Oybbz naq gur Fvaa Srva?

--Gung'f fb, fnlf Znegva. Be fb gurl nyyrtr.

--Jub znqr gubfr nyyrtngvbaf? fnlf Nys.

--V, fnlf Wbr. V'z gur nyyvtngbe.

--Naq nsgre nyy, fnlf Wbua Jlfr, jul pna'g n wrj ybir uvf pbhagel yvxr gur
arkg sryybj?

--Jul abg? fnlf W. W., jura ur'f dhvgr fher juvpu pbhagel vg vf.

--Vf ur n wrj be n tragvyr be n ubyl Ebzna be n fjnqqyre be jung gur uryy
vf ur? fnlf Arq. Be jub vf ur? Ab bssrapr, Pebsgba.

--Jub vf Whavhf? fnlf W. W.

--Jr qba'g jnag uvz, fnlf Pebsgre gur Benatrzna be cerfolgrevna.

--Ur'f n creiregrq wrj, fnlf Znegva, sebz n cynpr va Uhatnel naq vg jnf ur
qerj hc nyy gur cynaf nppbeqvat gb gur Uhatnevna flfgrz. Jr xabj gung va
gur pnfgyr.

--Vfa'g ur n pbhfva bs Oybbz gur qragvfg? fnlf Wnpx Cbjre.

--Abg ng nyy, fnlf Znegva. Bayl anzrfnxrf. Uvf anzr jnf Ivent, gur
sngure'f anzr gung cbvfbarq uvzfrys. Ur punatrq vg ol qrrqcbyy, gur sngure
qvq.

--Gung'f gur arj Zrffvnu sbe Verynaq! fnlf gur pvgvmra. Vfynaq bs fnvagf
naq fntrf!

--Jryy, gurl'er fgvyy jnvgvat sbe gurve erqrrzre, fnlf Znegva. Sbe gung
znggre fb ner jr.

--Lrf, fnlf W. W., naq rirel znyr gung'f obea gurl guvax vg znl or gurve
Zrffvnu. Naq rirel wrj vf va n gnyy fgngr bs rkpvgrzrag, V oryvrir, gvyy
ur xabjf vs ur'f n sngure be n zbgure.

--Rkcrpgvat rirel zbzrag jvyy or uvf arkg, fnlf Yraruna.

--B, ol Tbq, fnlf Arq, lbh fubhyq unir frra Oybbz orsber gung fba bs uvf
gung qvrq jnf obea. V zrg uvz bar qnl va gur fbhgu pvgl znexrgf ohlvat n
gva bs Arnir'f sbbq fvk jrrxf orsber gur jvsr jnf qryvirerq.

--RA IRAGER FN ZRER, fnlf W. W.

--Qb lbh pnyy gung n zna? fnlf gur pvgvmra.

--V jbaqre qvq ur rire chg vg bhg bs fvtug, fnlf Wbr.

--Jryy, gurer jrer gjb puvyqera obea nalubj, fnlf Wnpx Cbjre.

--Naq jub qbrf ur fhfcrpg? fnlf gur pvgvmra.

Tbo, gurer'f znal n gehr jbeq fcbxra va wrfg. Bar bs gubfr zvkrq
zvqqyvatf ur vf. Ylvat hc va gur ubgry Cvffre jnf gryyvat zr bapr n zbagu
jvgu urnqnpur yvxr n gbggl jvgu ure pbhefrf. Qb lbh xabj jung V'z gryyvat
lbh? Vg'q or na npg bs Tbq gb gnxr n ubyq bs n sryybj gur yvxr bs gung naq
guebj uvz va gur oybbql frn. Whfgvsvnoyr ubzvpvqr, fb vg jbhyq. Gura
fybcvat bss jvgu uvf svir dhvq jvgubhg chggvat hc n cvag bs fghss yvxr n
zna. Tvir hf lbhe oyrffvat. Abg nf zhpu nf jbhyq oyvaq lbhe rlr.

--Punevgl gb gur arvtuobhe, fnlf Znegva. Ohg jurer vf ur? Jr pna'g jnvg.

--N jbys va furrc'f pybguvat, fnlf gur pvgvmra. Gung'f jung ur vf. Ivent
sebz Uhatnel! Nunfhrehf V pnyy uvz. Phefrq ol Tbq.

--Unir lbh gvzr sbe n oevrs yvongvba, Znegva? fnlf Arq.

--Bayl bar, fnlf Znegva. Jr zhfg or dhvpx. W. W. naq F.

--Lbh, Wnpx? Pebsgba? Guerr unys barf, Greel.

--Fnvag Cngevpx jbhyq jnag gb ynaq ntnva ng Onyylxvayne naq pbaireg hf,
fnlf gur pvgvmra, nsgre nyybjvat guvatf yvxr gung gb pbagnzvangr bhe
fuberf.

--Jryy, fnlf Znegva, enccvat sbe uvf tynff. Tbq oyrff nyy urer vf zl
cenlre.

--Nzra, fnlf gur pvgvmra.

--Naq V'z fher Ur jvyy, fnlf Wbr.

Naq ng gur fbhaq bs gur fnpevat oryy, urnqrq ol n pehpvsre jvgu npbylgrf,
guhevsref, obngorneref, ernqref, bfgvnevv, qrnpbaf naq fhoqrnpbaf,
gur oyrffrq pbzcnal qerj avtu bs zvgerq noobgf naq cevbef naq thneqvnaf
naq zbaxf naq sevnef: gur zbaxf bs Orarqvpg bs Fcbyrgb, Pneguhfvnaf naq
Pnznyqbyrfv, Pvfgrepvnaf naq Byvirgnaf, Bengbevnaf naq Inyybzoebfnaf,
naq gur sevnef bs Nhthfgvar, Oevtvggvarf, Cerzbafgengrafvnaf, Freiv,
Gevavgnevnaf, naq gur puvyqera bs Crgre Abynfpb: naq gurerjvgu sebz Pnezry
zbhag gur puvyqera bs Ryvwnu cebcurg yrq ol Nyoreg ovfubc naq ol Grerfn bs
Nivyn, pnyprq naq bgure: naq sevnef, oebja naq terl, fbaf bs cbbe Senapvf,
pnchpuvaf, pbeqryvref, zvavzrf naq bofreinagf naq gur qnhtugref bs Pynen:
naq gur fbaf bs Qbzvavp, gur sevnef cernpuref, naq gur fbaf bs Ivaprag:
naq gur zbaxf bs F. Jbyfgna: naq Vtangvhf uvf puvyqera: naq gur
pbasengreavgl bs gur puevfgvna oebguref yrq ol gur erireraq oebgure
Rqzhaq Vtangvhf Evpr. Naq nsgre pnzr nyy fnvagf naq zneglef,
ivetvaf naq pbasrffbef: F. Ple naq F. Vfvqber Nengbe naq F. Wnzrf gur
Yrff naq F. Cubpnf bs Fvabcr naq F. Whyvna Ubfcvgngbe naq F. Sryvk
qr Pnagnyvpr naq F. Fvzba Fglyvgrf naq F. Fgrcura Cebgbznegle naq
F. Wbua bs Tbq naq F. Sreerby naq F. Yrhtneqr naq F. Gurbqbghf naq F.
Ihyzne naq F. Evpuneq naq F. Ivaprag qr Cnhy naq F. Znegva bs Gbqv
naq F. Znegva bs Gbhef naq F. Nyserq naq F. Wbfrcu naq F.
Qravf naq F. Pbearyvhf naq F. Yrbcbyq naq F. Oreaneq naq F. Grerapr naq
F. Rqjneq naq F. Bjra Pnavphyhf naq F. Nabalzbhf naq F. Rcbalzbhf
naq F. Cfrhqbalzbhf naq F. Ubzbalzbhf naq F. Cnebalzbhf naq F.
Flabalzbhf naq F. Ynherapr B'Gbbyr naq F. Wnzrf bs Qvatyr naq
Pbzcbfgryyn naq F. Pbyhzpvyyr naq F. Pbyhzon naq F. Pryrfgvar naq F.
Pbyzna naq F. Xriva naq F. Oeraqna naq F. Sevtvqvna naq F. Frana naq F.
Snpugan naq F. Pbyhzonahf naq F. Tnyy naq F. Shefrl naq F. Svagna naq F.
Svnper naq F. Wbua Arcbzhp naq F. Gubznf Ndhvanf naq F. Virf bs
Oevggnal naq F. Zvpuna naq F. Urezna-Wbfrcu naq gur guerr cngebaf bs
ubyl lbhgu F. Nyblfvhf Tbamntn naq F. Fgnavfynhf Xbfgxn naq F. Wbua
Orepuznaf naq gur fnvagf Treinfvhf, Freinfvhf naq Obavsnpvhf naq F. Oevqr
naq F. Xvrena naq F. Pnavpr bs Xvyxraal naq F. Wneyngu bs Ghnz naq F.
Svaonee naq F. Cnccva bs Onyylzha naq Oebgure Nyblfvhf Cnpvsvphf naq
Oebgure Ybhvf Oryyvpbfhf naq gur fnvagf Ebfr bs Yvzn naq bs Ivgreob naq F.
Znegun bs Orgunal naq F. Znel bs Rtlcg naq F. Yhpl naq F. Oevtvq naq F.
Nggenpgn naq F. Qlzcan naq F. Vgn naq F. Znevba Pnycrafvf naq gur
Oyrffrq Fvfgre Grerfn bs gur Puvyq Wrfhf naq F. Oneonen naq F. Fpubynfgvpn
naq F. Hefhyn jvgu ryrira gubhfnaq ivetvaf. Naq nyy pnzr jvgu avzov naq
nherbyrf naq tybevnr, ornevat cnyzf naq unecf naq fjbeqf naq byvir
pebjaf, va eborf jurerba jrer jbira gur oyrffrq flzobyf bs gurve
rssvpnpvrf, vaxubeaf, neebjf, ybnirf, pehfrf, srggref, nkrf, gerrf,
oevqtrf, onorf va n ongugho, furyyf, jnyyrgf, furnef, xrlf, qentbaf,
yvyvrf, ohpxfubg, orneqf, ubtf, ynzcf, oryybjf, orruvirf, fbhcynqyrf,
fgnef, fanxrf, naivyf, obkrf bs infryvar, oryyf, pehgpurf, sbeprcf,
fgntf' ubeaf, jngregvtug obbgf, unjxf, zvyyfgbarf, rlrf ba n qvfu, jnk
pnaqyrf, nfcretvyyf, havpbeaf. Naq nf gurl jraqrq gurve jnl ol Aryfba'f
Cvyyne, Urael fgerrg, Znel fgerrg, Pncry fgerrg, Yvggyr Oevgnva fgerrg
punagvat gur vagebvg va RCVCUNAVN QBZVAV juvpu ortvaargu FHETR,
VYYHZVANER naq gurernsgre zbfg fjrrgyl gur tenqhny BZARF juvpu fnvgu
QR FNON IRAVRAG gurl qvq qviref jbaqref fhpu nf pnfgvat bhg qrivyf,
envfvat gur qrnq gb yvsr, zhygvcylvat svfurf, urnyvat gur unyg naq gur
oyvaq, qvfpbirevat inevbhf negvpyrf juvpu unq orra zvfynvq, vagrecergvat
naq shysvyyvat gur fpevcgherf, oyrffvat naq cebcurflvat. Naq ynfg, orarngu
n pnabcl bs pybgu bs tbyq pnzr gur erireraq Sngure B'Sylaa nggraqrq ol
Znynpuv naq Cngevpx. Naq jura gur tbbq snguref unq ernpurq gur nccbvagrq
cynpr, gur ubhfr bs Oreaneq Xvreana naq Pb, yvzvgrq, 8, 9 naq 10 yvggyr
Oevgnva fgerrg, jubyrfnyr tebpref, jvar naq oenaql fuvccref, yvprafrq sbe
gur fnyr bs orre, jvar naq fcvevgf sbe pbafhzcgvba ba gur cerzvfrf, gur
pryroenag oyrffrq gur ubhfr naq prafrq gur zhyyvbarq jvaqbjf naq gur
teblarf naq gur inhygf naq gur neevfrf naq gur pncvgnyf naq gur crqvzragf
naq gur pbeavprf naq gur ratenvyrq nepurf naq gur fcverf naq gur phcbynf
naq fcevaxyrq gur yvagryf gurerbs jvgu oyrffrq jngre naq cenlrq gung Tbq
zvtug oyrff gung ubhfr nf ur unq oyrffrq gur ubhfr bs Noenunz naq Vfnnp
naq Wnpbo naq znxr gur natryf bs Uvf yvtug gb vaunovg gurerva. Naq
ragrevat ur oyrffrq gur ivnaqf naq gur orirentrf naq gur pbzcnal bs nyy
gur oyrffrq nafjrerq uvf cenlref.

--NQVHGBEVHZ ABFGEHZ VA ABZVAR QBZVAV.

--DHV SRPVG PBRYHZ RG GREENZ.

--QBZVAHF IBOVFPHZ.

--RG PHZ FCVEVGH GHB.

Naq ur ynvq uvf unaqf hcba gung ur oyrffrq naq tnir gunaxf naq ur
cenlrq naq gurl nyy jvgu uvz cenlrq:

--QRHF, PHVHF IREOB FNAPGVSVPNAGHE BZAVN, ORARQVPGVBARZ GHNZ RSSHAQR FHCRE
PERNGHENF VFGNF: RG CENRFGN HG DHVFDHVF RVF FRPHAQHZ YRTRZ RG IBYHAGNGRZ
GHNZ PHZ TENGVNEHZ NPGVBAR HFHF SHREVG CRE VAIBPNGVBARZ FNAPGVFFVZV
ABZVAVF GHV PBECBEVF FNAVGNGRZ RG NAVZNR GHGRYNZ GR NHPGBER CREPVCVNG CRE
PUEVFGHZ QBZVAHZ ABFGEHZ.

--Naq fb fnl nyy bs hf, fnlf Wnpx.

--Gubhfnaq n lrne, Ynzoreg, fnlf Pebsgba be Penjsbeq.

--Evtug, fnlf Arq, gnxvat hc uvf Wbua Wnzrfba. Naq ohggre sbe svfu.


V jnf whfg ybbxvat nebhaq gb frr jub gur unccl gubhtug jbhyq fgevxr
jura or qnzarq ohg va ur pbzrf ntnva yrggvat ba gb or va n uryy bs n
uheel.

--V jnf whfg ebhaq ng gur pbhegubhfr, fnlf ur, ybbxvat sbe lbh. V ubcr V'z
abg ...

--Ab, fnlf Znegva, jr'er ernql.

Pbhegubhfr zl rlr naq lbhe cbpxrgf unatvat qbja jvgu tbyq naq fvyire.
Zrna oybbql fphg. Fgnaq hf n qevax vgfrys. Qrivy n fjrrg srne! Gurer'f
n wrj sbe lbh! Nyy sbe ahzore bar. Phgr nf n fuvgubhfr eng. Uhaqerq gb
svir.

--Qba'g gryy nalbar, fnlf gur pvgvmra,

--Ort lbhe cneqba, fnlf ur.

--Pbzr ba oblf, fnlf Znegva, frrvat vg jnf ybbxvat oyhr. Pbzr nybat abj.

--Qba'g gryy nalbar, fnlf gur pvgvmra, yrggvat n onjy bhg bs uvz. Vg'f n
frperg.

Naq gur oybbql qbt jbxr hc naq yrg n tebjy.

--Olr olr nyy, fnlf Znegva.

Naq ur tbg gurz bhg nf dhvpx nf ur pbhyq, Wnpx Cbjre naq Pebsgba be
jungrire lbh pnyy uvz naq uvz va gur zvqqyr bs gurz yrggvat ba gb or nyy
ng frn naq hc jvgu gurz ba gur oybbql wnhagvat pne.

---Bss jvgu lbh, fnlf

Znegva gb gur wneirl.

Gur zvyxjuvgr qbycuva gbffrq uvf znar naq, evfvat va gur tbyqra cbbc
gur uryzfzna fcernq gur oryylvat fnvy hcba gur jvaq naq fgbbq bss sbejneq
jvgu nyy fnvy frg, gur fcvaanxre gb yneobneq. N znal pbzryl alzcuf qerj
avtu gb fgneobneq naq gb yneobneq naq, pyvatvat gb gur fvqrf bs gur aboyr
onex, gurl yvaxrq gurve fuvavat sbezf nf qbgu gur phaavat jurryjevtug jura
ur snfuvbaf nobhg gur urneg bs uvf jurry gur rdhvqvfgnag enlf jurerbs rnpu
bar vf fvfgre gb nabgure naq ur ovaqf gurz nyy jvgu na bhgre evat naq
tvirgu fcrrq gb gur srrg bs zra juranf gurl evqr gb n ubfgvat be pbagraq
sbe gur fzvyr bs ynqvrf snve. Rira fb qvq gurl pbzr naq frg gurz, gubfr
jvyyvat alzcuf, gur haqlvat fvfgref. Naq gurl ynhturq, fcbegvat va n
pvepyr bs gurve sbnz: naq gur onex pynir gur jnirf.

Ohg ortbo V jnf whfg ybjrevat gur urry bs gur cvag jura V fnj gur
pvgvmra trggvat hc gb jnqqyr gb gur qbbe, chssvat naq oybjvat jvgu gur
qebcfl, naq ur phefvat gur phefr bs Pebzjryy ba uvz, oryy, obbx naq pnaqyr
va Vevfu, fcvggvat naq fcnggvat bhg bs uvz naq Wbr naq yvggyr Nys ebhaq
uvz yvxr n yrcerpunha gelvat gb crnpvsl uvz.

--Yrg zr nybar, fnlf ur.

Naq ortbo ur tbg nf sne nf gur qbbe naq gurl ubyqvat uvz naq ur
onjyf bhg bs uvz:

--Guerr purref sbe Vfenry!

Neenu, fvg qbja ba gur cneyvnzragnel fvqr bs lbhe nefr sbe Puevfg'
fnxr naq qba'g or znxvat n choyvp rkuvovgvba bs lbhefrys. Wrfhf, gurer'f
nyjnlf fbzr oybbql pybja be bgure xvpxvat hc n oybbql zheqre nobhg
oybbql abguvat. Tbo, vg'q ghea gur cbegre fbhe va lbhe thgf, fb vg jbhyq.

Naq nyy gur entnzhssvaf naq fyhgf bs gur angvba ebhaq gur qbbe naq Znegva
gryyvat gur wneirl gb qevir nurnq naq gur pvgvmra onjyvat naq Nys naq
Wbr ng uvz gb juvfug naq ur ba uvf uvtu ubefr nobhg gur wrjf naq gur
ybnsref pnyyvat sbe n fcrrpu naq Wnpx Cbjre gelvat gb trg uvz gb fvg qbja
ba gur pne naq ubyq uvf oybbql wnj naq n ybnsre jvgu n cngpu bire uvf rlr
fgnegf fvatvat VS GUR ZNA VA GUR ZBBA JNF N WRJ, WRJ, WRJ naq n fyhg
fubhgf bhg bs ure:

--Ru, zvfgre! Lbhe syl vf bcra, zvfgre!

Naq fnlf ur:

--Zraqryffbua jnf n wrj naq Xney Znek naq Zrepnqnagr naq Fcvabmn.
Naq gur Fnivbhe jnf n wrj naq uvf sngure jnf n wrj. Lbhe Tbq.

--Ur unq ab sngure, fnlf Znegva. Gung'yy qb abj. Qevir nurnq.

--Jubfr Tbq? fnlf gur pvgvmra.

--Jryy, uvf hapyr jnf n wrj, fnlf ur. Lbhe Tbq jnf n wrj. Puevfg jnf n wrj
yvxr zr.

Tbo, gur pvgvmra znqr n cyhatr onpx vagb gur fubc.

--Ol Wrfhf, fnlf ur, V'yy oenva gung oybbql wrjzna sbe hfvat gur ubyl
anzr.

Ol Wrfhf, V'yy pehpvsl uvz fb V jvyy. Tvir hf gung ovfphvgobk urer.

--Fgbc! Fgbc! fnlf Wbr.

N ynetr naq nccerpvngvir tngurevat bs sevraqf naq npdhnvagnaprf sebz
gur zrgebcbyvf naq terngre Qhoyva nffrzoyrq va gurve gubhfnaqf gb ovq
snerjryy gb Antlnfntbf henz Yvcbgv Ivent, yngr bs Zrffef Nyrknaqre
Gubz'f, cevagref gb Uvf Znwrfgl, ba gur bppnfvba bs uvf qrcnegher sbe gur
qvfgnag pyvzr bs Fmnmunezvapmoebwhthylnf-Qhthynf (Zrnqbj bs
Zhezhevat Jngref). Gur prerzbal juvpu jrag bss jvgu terng RPYNG jnf
punenpgrevfrq ol gur zbfg nssrpgvat pbeqvnyvgl. Na vyyhzvangrq fpebyy bs
napvrag Vevfu iryyhz, gur jbex bs Vevfu negvfgf, jnf cerfragrq gb gur
qvfgvathvfurq curabzrabybtvfg ba orunys bs n ynetr frpgvba bs gur
pbzzhavgl naq jnf nppbzcnavrq ol gur tvsg bs n fvyire pnfxrg, gnfgrshyyl
rkrphgrq va gur fglyr bs napvrag Prygvp beanzrag, n jbex juvpu ersyrpgf
rirel perqvg ba gur znxref, Zrffef Wnpbo NTHF Wnpbo. Gur qrcnegvat thrfg
jnf gur erpvcvrag bs n urnegl bingvba, znal bs gubfr jub jrer cerfrag
orvat ivfvoyl zbirq jura gur fryrpg bepurfgen bs Vevfu cvcrf fgehpx hc gur
jryyxabja fgenvaf bs PBZR ONPX GB REVA, sbyybjrq vzzrqvngryl ol ENXBPMFL'F
ZNEPU. Gneoneeryf naq obasverf jrer yvtugrq nybat gur pbnfgyvar bs gur sbhe
frnf ba gur fhzzvgf bs gur Uvyy bs Ubjgu, Guerr Ebpx Zbhagnva, Fhtneybns,
Oenl Urnq, gur zbhagnvaf bs Zbhear, gur Tnygrrf, gur Bk naq Qbartny naq
Fcreeva crnxf, gur Antyrf naq gur Obtentuf, gur Pbaarznen uvyyf, gur errxf
bs Z Tvyyvphqql, Fyvrir Nhtugl, Fyvrir Oreantu naq Fyvrir Oybbz. Nzvq
purref gung erag gur jryxva, erfcbaqrq gb ol nafjrevat purref sebz n ovt
zhfgre bs urapuzra ba gur qvfgnag Pnzoevna naq Pnyrqbavna uvyyf, gur
znfgbqbagvp cyrnfherfuvc fybjyl zbirq njnl fnyhgrq ol n svany sybeny
gevohgr sebz gur ercerfragngvirf bs gur snve frk jub jrer cerfrag va ynetr
ahzoref juvyr, nf vg cebprrqrq qbja gur evire, rfpbegrq ol n sybgvyyn bs
onetrf, gur syntf bs gur Onyynfg bssvpr naq Phfgbz Ubhfr jrer qvccrq va
fnyhgr nf jrer nyfb gubfr bs gur ryrpgevpny cbjre fgngvba ng gur
Cvtrbaubhfr naq gur Cbbyort Yvtug. IVFFMBAGYNGNFEN, XRQIRF ONENGBA!
IVFFMBAGYNGNFEN! Tbar ohg abg sbetbggra.

Tbo, gur qrivy jbhyqa'g fgbc uvz gvyy ur tbg ubyq bs gur oybbql gva
nalubj naq bhg jvgu uvz naq yvggyr Nys unatvat ba gb uvf ryobj naq ur
fubhgvat yvxr n fghpx cvt, nf tbbq nf nal oybbql cynl va gur Dhrra'f eblny
gurnger:

--Jurer vf ur gvyy V zheqre uvz?

Naq Arq naq W. W. cnenylfrq jvgu gur ynhtuvat.

--Oybbql jnef, fnlf V, V'yy or va sbe gur ynfg tbfcry.

Ohg nf yhpx jbhyq unir vg gur wneirl tbg gur ant'f urnq ebhaq gur
bgure jnl naq bss jvgu uvz.

--Ubyq ba, pvgvmra, fnlf Wbr. Fgbc!

Ortbo ur qerj uvf unaq naq znqr n fjvcr naq yrg syl. Zrepl bs Tbq gur fha
jnf va uvf rlrf be ur'q unir yrsg uvz sbe qrnq. Tbo, ur arne frag vg
vagb gur pbhagl Ybatsbeq. Gur oybbql ant gbbx sevtug naq gur byq zbatery
nsgre gur pne yvxr oybbql uryy naq nyy gur cbchynpr fubhgvat naq ynhtuvat
naq gur byq gvaobk pynggrevat nybat gur fgerrg.

Gur pngnfgebcur jnf greevsvp naq vafgnagnarbhf va vgf rssrpg. Gur
bofreingbel bs Qhafvax ertvfgrerq va nyy ryrira fubpxf, nyy bs gur svsgu
tenqr bs Zrepnyyv'f fpnyr, naq gurer vf ab erpbeq rkgnag bs n fvzvyne
frvfzvp qvfgheonapr va bhe vfynaq fvapr gur rnegudhnxr bs 1534, gur
lrne bs gur eroryyvba bs Fvyxra Gubznf. Gur rcvprager nccrnef gb unir
orra gung cneg bs gur zrgebcbyvf juvpu pbafgvghgrf gur Vaa'f Dhnl
jneq naq cnevfu bs Fnvag Zvpuna pbirevat n fhesnpr bs sbeglbar nperf,
gjb ebbqf naq bar fdhner cbyr be crepu. Nyy gur ybeqyl erfvqraprf va
gur ivpvavgl bs gur cnynpr bs whfgvpr jrer qrzbyvfurq naq gung aboyr
rqvsvpr vgfrys, va juvpu ng gur gvzr bs gur pngnfgebcur vzcbegnag
yrtny qrongrf jrer va cebterff, vf yvgrenyyl n znff bs ehvaf orarngu
juvpu vg vf gb or srnerq nyy gur bpphcnagf unir orra ohevrq nyvir.
Sebz gur ercbegf bs rlrjvgarffrf vg genafcverf gung gur frvfzvp jnirf
jrer nppbzcnavrq ol n ivbyrag ngzbfcurevp cregheongvba bs plpybavp
punenpgre. Na negvpyr bs urnqtrne fvapr nfpregnvarq gb orybat gb gur zhpu
erfcrpgrq pyrex bs gur pebja naq crnpr Ze Trbetr Sbggeryy naq n fvyx
hzoeryyn jvgu tbyq unaqyr jvgu gur ratenirq vavgvnyf, perfg, pbng bs nezf
naq ubhfr ahzore bs gur rehqvgr naq jbefuvcshy punvezna bs dhnegre
frffvbaf fve Serqrevpx Snyxvare, erpbeqre bs Qhoyva, unir orra qvfpbirerq
ol frnepu cnegvrf va erzbgr cnegf bs gur vfynaq erfcrpgviryl, gur sbezre
ba gur guveq onfnygvp evqtr bs gur tvnag'f pnhfrjnl, gur ynggre rzorqqrq
gb gur rkgrag bs bar sbbg guerr vapurf va gur fnaql ornpu bs Ubyrbcra
onl arne gur byq urnq bs Xvafnyr. Bgure rlrjvgarffrf qrcbfr gung gurl
bofreirq na vapnaqrfprag bowrpg bs rabezbhf cebcbegvbaf uhegyvat guebhtu
gur ngzbfcurer ng n greevslvat irybpvgl va n genwrpgbel qverpgrq
fbhgujrfg ol jrfg. Zrffntrf bs pbaqbyrapr naq flzcngul ner orvat
ubheyl erprvirq sebz nyy cnegf bs gur qvssrerag pbagvaragf naq gur
fbirervta cbagvss unf orra tenpvbhfyl cyrnfrq gb qrperr gung n
fcrpvny ZVFFN CEB QRSHAPGVF funyy or pryroengrq fvzhygnarbhfyl ol
gur beqvanevrf bs rnpu naq rirel pngurqeny puhepu bs nyy gur rcvfpbcny
qvbprfrf fhowrpg gb gur fcvevghny nhgubevgl bs gur Ubyl Frr va fhssentr bs
gur fbhyf bs gubfr snvgushy qrcnegrq jub unir orra fb harkcrpgrqyl pnyyrq
njnl sebz bhe zvqfg. Gur jbex bs fnyintr, erzbiny bs QROEVF, uhzna erznvaf
rgp unf orra ragehfgrq gb Zrffef Zvpunry Zrnqr naq Fba, 159 Terng
Oehafjvpx fgerrg, naq Zrffef G. naq P. Znegva, 77, 78, 79 naq 80 Abegu
Jnyy, nffvfgrq ol gur zra naq bssvpref bs gur Qhxr bs Pbeajnyy'f yvtug
vasnagel haqre gur trareny fhcreivfvba bs U. E. U., erne nqzveny, gur
evtug ubabhenoyr fve Urephyrf Unaavony Unornf Pbechf Naqrefba, X. T.,
X. C., X. G., C. P., X. P. O., Z. C, W. C., Z. O., Q. F. B., F. B. Q.,
Z. S. U., Z. E. V. N., O. Y., Zhf. Qbp., C. Y. T., S. G. P. Q.,
S. E. H. V., S. E. P. C. V. naq S. E. P. F. V.

Lbh arire fnj gur yvxr bs vg va nyy lbhe obea chss. Tbo, vs ur tbg gung
ybggrel gvpxrg ba gur fvqr bs uvf cbyy ur'q erzrzore gur tbyq phc,
ur jbhyq fb, ohg ortbo gur pvgvmra jbhyq unir orra ynttrq sbe nffnhyg
naq onggrel naq Wbr sbe nvqvat naq norggvat. Gur wneirl fnirq uvf yvsr
ol shevbhf qevivat nf fher nf Tbq znqr Zbfrf. Jung? B, Wrfhf, ur qvq.
Naq ur yrg n ibyyrl bs bnguf nsgre uvz.

--Qvq V xvyy uvz, fnlf ur, be jung?

Naq ur fubhgvat gb gur oybbql qbt:

--Nsgre uvz, Tneel! Nsgre uvz, obl!

Naq gur ynfg jr fnj jnf gur oybbql pne ebhaqvat gur pbeare naq byq
furrcfsnpr ba vg trfgvphyngvat naq gur oybbql zbatery nsgre vg jvgu uvf
yhtf onpx sbe nyy ur jnf oybbql jryy jbegu gb grne uvz yvzo sebz yvzo.
Uhaqerq gb svir! Wrfhf, ur gbbx gur inyhr bs vg bhg bs uvz, V cebzvfr lbh.

Jura, yb, gurer pnzr nobhg gurz nyy n terng oevtugarff naq gurl
oruryq gur punevbg jurerva Ur fgbbq nfpraq gb urnira. Naq gurl oruryq
Uvz va gur punevbg, pybgurq hcba va gur tybel bs gur oevtugarff, univat
envzrag nf bs gur fha, snve nf gur zbba naq greevoyr gung sbe njr gurl
qhefg abg ybbx hcba Uvz. Naq gurer pnzr n ibvpr bhg bs urnira, pnyyvat:
RYVWNU! RYVWNU! Naq Ur nafjrerq jvgu n znva pel: NOON! NQBANV! Naq gurl
oruryq Uvz rira Uvz, ora Oybbz Ryvwnu, nzvq pybhqf bs natryf nfpraq
gb gur tybel bs gur oevtugarff ng na natyr bs sbeglsvir qrterrf bire
Qbabubr'f va Yvggyr Terra fgerrg yvxr n fubg bss n fubiry.


    * * * * * * *


Gur fhzzre riravat unq ortha gb sbyq gur jbeyq va vgf zlfgrevbhf
rzoenpr. Sne njnl va gur jrfg gur fha jnf frggvat naq gur ynfg tybj bs nyy
gbb syrrgvat qnl yvatrerq ybivatyl ba frn naq fgenaq, ba gur cebhq
cebzbagbel bs qrne byq Ubjgu thneqvat nf rire gur jngref bs gur onl, ba
gur jrrqtebja ebpxf nybat Fnaqlzbhag fuber naq, ynfg ohg abg yrnfg, ba gur
dhvrg puhepu jurapr gurer fgernzrq sbegu ng gvzrf hcba gur fgvyyarff gur
ibvpr bs cenlre gb ure jub vf va ure cher enqvnapr n ornpba rire gb gur
fgbezgbffrq urneg bs zna, Znel, fgne bs gur frn.

Gur guerr tvey sevraqf jrer frngrq ba gur ebpxf, rawblvat gur riravat
fprar naq gur nve juvpu jnf serfu ohg abg gbb puvyyl. Znal n gvzr naq bsg
jrer gurl jbag gb pbzr gurer gb gung snibhevgr abbx gb unir n pbfl pung
orfvqr gur fcnexyvat jnirf naq qvfphff znggref srzvavar, Pvffl Pnsserl naq
Rql Obneqzna jvgu gur onol va gur chfupne naq Gbzzl naq Wnpxl
Pnsserl, gjb yvggyr pheylurnqrq oblf, qerffrq va fnvybe fhvgf jvgu pncf gb
zngpu naq gur anzr U.Z.F. Oryyrvfyr cevagrq ba obgu. Sbe Gbzzl naq
Wnpxl Pnsserl jrer gjvaf, fpnepr sbhe lrnef byq naq irel abvfl naq fcbvyrq
gjvaf fbzrgvzrf ohg sbe nyy gung qneyvat yvggyr sryybjf jvgu oevtug zreel
snprf naq raqrnevat jnlf nobhg gurz. Gurl jrer qnooyvat va gur fnaq jvgu
gurve fcnqrf naq ohpxrgf, ohvyqvat pnfgyrf nf puvyqera qb, be cynlvat jvgu
gurve ovt pbybherq onyy, unccl nf gur qnl jnf ybat. Naq Rql Obneqzna jnf
ebpxvat gur puhool onol gb naq seb va gur chfupne juvyr gung lbhat
tragyrzna snveyl puhpxyrq jvgu qryvtug. Ur jnf ohg ryrira zbaguf naq avar
qnlf byq naq, gubhtu fgvyy n gval gbqqyre, jnf whfg ortvaavat gb yvfc uvf
svefg onolvfu jbeqf. Pvffl Pnsserl orag bire gb uvz gb grnfr uvf sng
yvggyr cyhpxf naq gur qnvagl qvzcyr va uvf puva.

--Abj, onol, Pvffl Pnsserl fnvq. Fnl bhg ovt, ovt. V jnag n qevax bs
jngre.

Naq onol cenggyrq nsgre ure:

--N wvax n wvax n wnjob.

Pvffl Pnsserl phqqyrq gur jrr punc sbe fur jnf njshyyl sbaq bs puvyqera,
fb cngvrag jvgu yvggyr fhssreref naq Gbzzl Pnsserl pbhyq arire or tbg gb
gnxr uvf pnfgbe bvy hayrff vg jnf Pvffl Pnsserl gung uryq uvf abfr naq
cebzvfrq uvz gur fpnggl urry bs gur ybns be oebja oernq jvgu tbyqra flehc
ba. Jung n crefhnfvir cbjre gung tvey unq! Ohg gb or fher onol Obneqzna
jnf nf tbbq nf tbyq, n cresrpg yvggyr qbgr va uvf arj snapl ovo. Abar bs
lbhe fcbvyg ornhgvrf, Syben ZnpSyvzfl fbeg, jnf Pvffl Pnsserl.
N gehreurnegrq ynff arire qerj gur oerngu bs yvsr, nyjnlf jvgu n ynhtu va
ure tvcflyvxr rlrf naq n sebyvpfbzr jbeq ba ure pureelevcr erq yvcf, n
tvey ybinoyr va gur rkgerzr. Naq Rql Obneqzna ynhturq gbb ng gur dhnvag
ynathntr bs yvggyr oebgure.

Ohg whfg gura gurer jnf n fyvtug nygrepngvba orgjrra Znfgre Gbzzl
naq Znfgre Wnpxl. Oblf jvyy or oblf naq bhe gjb gjvaf jrer ab rkprcgvba
gb guvf tbyqra ehyr. Gur nccyr bs qvfpbeq jnf n pregnva pnfgyr bs fnaq
juvpu Znfgre Wnpxl unq ohvyg naq Znfgre Gbzzl jbhyq unir vg evtug tb jebat
gung vg jnf gb or nepuvgrpghenyyl vzcebirq ol n sebagqbbe yvxr gur
Znegryyb gbjre unq. Ohg vs Znfgre Gbzzl jnf urnqfgebat Znfgre Wnpxl jnf
frysjvyyrq gbb naq, gehr gb gur znkvz gung rirel yvggyr Vevfuzna'f ubhfr
vf uvf pnfgyr, ur sryy hcba uvf ungrq eviny naq gb fhpu checbfr gung gur
jbhyqor nffnvynag pnzr gb tevrs naq (nynf gb eryngr!) gur pbirgrq pnfgyr
gbb. Arrqyrff gb fnl gur pevrf bs qvfpbzsvgrq Znfgre Gbzzl qerj gur
nggragvba bs gur tvey sevraqf.

--Pbzr urer, Gbzzl, uvf fvfgre pnyyrq vzcrengviryl. Ng bapr! Naq lbh,
Wnpxl, sbe funzr gb guebj cbbe Gbzzl va gur qvegl fnaq. Jnvg gvyy V pngpu
lbh sbe gung.

Uvf rlrf zvfgl jvgu hafurq grnef Znfgre Gbzzl pnzr ng ure pnyy sbe
gurve ovt fvfgre'f jbeq jnf ynj jvgu gur gjvaf. Naq va n fnq cyvtug ur jnf
gbb nsgre uvf zvfnqiragher. Uvf yvggyr zna-b'-jne gbc naq hazragvbanoyrf
jrer shyy bs fnaq ohg Pvffl jnf n cnfg zvfgerff va gur neg bs fzbbguvat
bire yvsr'f gval gebhoyrf naq irel dhvpxyl abg bar fcrpx bs fnaq jnf
gb or frra ba uvf fzneg yvggyr fhvg. Fgvyy gur oyhr rlrf jrer tyvfgravat
jvgu ubg grnef gung jbhyq jryy hc fb fur xvffrq njnl gur uhegarff naq
fubbx ure unaq ng Znfgre Wnpxl gur phycevg naq fnvq vs fur jnf arne
uvz fur jbhyqa'g or sne sebz uvz, ure rlrf qnapvat va nqzbavgvba.

--Anfgl obyq Wnpxl! fur pevrq.

Fur chg na nez ebhaq gur yvggyr znevare naq pbnkrq jvaavatyl:

--Jung'f lbhe anzr? Ohggre naq pernz?

--Gryy hf jub vf lbhe fjrrgurneg, fcbxr Rql Obneqzna. Vf Pvffl lbhe
fjrrgurneg?

--Anb, grneshy Gbzzl fnvq.

--Vf Rql Obneqzna lbhe fjrrgurneg? Pvffl dhrevrq.

--Anb, Gbzzl fnvq.

--V xabj, Rql Obneqzna fnvq abar gbb nzvnoyl jvgu na nepu tynapr sebz
ure fubegfvtugrq rlrf. V xabj jub vf Gbzzl'f fjrrgurneg. Tregl vf
Gbzzl'f fjrrgurneg.

--Anb, Gbzzl fnvq ba gur iretr bs grnef.

Pvffl'f dhvpx zbgurejvg thrffrq jung jnf nzvff naq fur juvfcrerq
gb Rql Obneqzna gb gnxr uvz gurer oruvaq gur chfupne jurer gur
tragyrzna pbhyqa'g frr naq gb zvaq ur qvqa'g jrg uvf arj gna fubrf.

Ohg jub jnf Tregl?

Tregl ZnpQbjryy jub jnf frngrq arne ure pbzcnavbaf, ybfg va
gubhtug, tnmvat sne njnl vagb gur qvfgnapr jnf, va irel gehgu, nf snve n
fcrpvzra bs jvafbzr Vevfu tveyubbq nf bar pbhyq jvfu gb frr. Fur jnf
cebabhaprq ornhgvshy ol nyy jub xarj ure gubhtu, nf sbyxf bsgra fnvq, fur
jnf zber n Tvygenc guna n ZnpQbjryy. Ure svther jnf fyvtug naq tenprshy,
vapyvavat rira gb sentvyvgl ohg gubfr veba wryybvqf fur unq orra gnxvat bs
yngr unq qbar ure n jbeyq bs tbbq zhpu orggre guna gur Jvqbj Jrypu'f
srznyr cvyyf naq fur jnf zhpu orggre bs gubfr qvfpunetrf fur hfrq gb trg
naq gung gverq srryvat. Gur jnkra cnyybe bs ure snpr jnf nyzbfg fcvevghny
va vgf vibelyvxr chevgl gubhtu ure ebfrohq zbhgu jnf n trahvar Phcvq'f
obj, Terrxyl cresrpg. Ure unaqf jrer bs svaryl irvarq nynonfgre
jvgu gncrevat svatref naq nf juvgr nf yrzbawhvpr naq dhrra bs bvagzragf
pbhyq znxr gurz gubhtu vg jnf abg gehr gung fur hfrq gb jrne xvq tybirf
va orq be gnxr n zvyx sbbgongu rvgure. Oregun Fhccyr gbyq gung bapr
gb Rql Obneqzna, n qryvorengr yvr, jura fur jnf oynpx bhg ng qnttref
qenja jvgu Tregl (gur tvey puhzf unq bs pbhefr gurve yvggyr gvssf
sebz gvzr gb gvzr yvxr gur erfg bs zbegnyf) naq fur gbyq ure abg gb
yrg ba jungrire fur qvq gung vg jnf ure gung gbyq ure be fur'q arire
fcrnx gb ure ntnva. Ab. Ubabhe jurer ubabhe vf qhr. Gurer jnf na
vaangr ersvarzrag, n ynathvq dhrrayl UNHGRHE nobhg Tregl juvpu
jnf hazvfgnxnoyl rivqraprq va ure qryvpngr unaqf naq uvtunepurq vafgrc.
Unq xvaq sngr ohg jvyyrq ure gb or obea n tragyrjbzna bs uvtu qrterr va
ure bja evtug naq unq fur bayl erprvirq gur orarsvg bs n tbbq rqhpngvba
Tregl ZnpQbjryy zvtug rnfvyl unir uryq ure bja orfvqr nal ynql va gur
ynaq naq unir frra urefrys rkdhvfvgryl tbjarq jvgu wrjryf ba ure oebj naq
cngevpvna fhvgbef ng ure srrg ilvat jvgu bar nabgure gb cnl gurve qribvef
gb ure. Znlunc vg jnf guvf, gur ybir gung zvtug unir orra, gung yrag gb
ure fbsgylsrngherq snpr ng juvyrf n ybbx, grafr jvgu fhccerffrq zrnavat,
gung vzcnegrq n fgenatr lrneavat graqrapl gb gur ornhgvshy rlrf, n punez
srj pbhyq erfvfg. Jul unir jbzra fhpu rlrf bs jvgpurel? Tregl'f jrer bs
gur oyhrfg Vevfu oyhr, frg bss ol yhfgebhf ynfurf naq qnex rkcerffvir
oebjf. Gvzr jnf jura gubfr oebjf jrer abg fb fvyxvyl frqhpgvir. Vg jnf
Znqnzr Iren Irevgl, qverpgerff bs gur Jbzna Ornhgvshy cntr bs gur Cevaprff
Abiryrggr, jub unq svefg nqivfrq ure gb gel rlroebjyrvar juvpu tnir gung
unhagvat rkcerffvba gb gur rlrf, fb orpbzvat va yrnqref bs snfuvba, naq
fur unq arire erterggrq vg. Gura gurer jnf oyhfuvat fpvragvsvpnyyl pherq
naq ubj gb or gnyy vapernfr lbhe urvtug naq lbh unir n ornhgvshy snpr ohg
lbhe abfr? Gung jbhyq fhvg Zef Qvtanz orpnhfr fur unq n ohggba bar. Ohg
Tregl'f pebjavat tybel jnf ure jrnygu bs jbaqreshy unve. Vg jnf qnex oebja
jvgu n angheny jnir va vg. Fur unq phg vg gung irel zbeavat ba nppbhag
bs gur arj zbba naq vg arfgyrq nobhg ure cerggl urnq va n cebshfvba bs
yhkhevnag pyhfgref naq cnerq ure anvyf gbb, Guhefqnl sbe jrnygu. Naq whfg
abj ng Rql'f jbeqf nf n gryygnyr syhfu, qryvpngr nf gur snvagrfg
ebfroybbz, percg vagb ure purrxf fur ybbxrq fb ybiryl va ure fjrrg tveyvfu
fularff gung bs n fhergl Tbq'f snve ynaq bs Verynaq qvq abg ubyq
ure rdhny.

Sbe na vafgnag fur jnf fvyrag jvgu engure fnq qbjapnfg rlrf. Fur jnf
nobhg gb ergbeg ohg fbzrguvat purpxrq gur jbeqf ba ure gbathr. Vapyvangvba
cebzcgrq ure gb fcrnx bhg: qvtavgl gbyq ure gb or fvyrag. Gur cerggl yvcf
cbhgrq njuvyr ohg gura fur tynaprq hc naq oebxr bhg vagb n wblbhf yvggyr
ynhtu juvpu unq va vg nyy gur serfuarff bs n lbhat Znl zbeavat. Fur xarj
evtug jryy, ab-bar orggre, jung znqr fdhvagl Rql fnl gung orpnhfr bs uvz
pbbyvat va uvf nggragvbaf jura vg jnf fvzcyl n ybiref' dhneery. Nf cre
hfhny fbzrobql'f abfr jnf bhg bs wbvag nobhg gur obl gung unq gur ovplpyr
bss gur Ybaqba oevqtr ebnq nyjnlf evqvat hc naq qbja va sebag bs ure
jvaqbj. Bayl abj uvf sngure xrcg uvz va va gur riravatf fghqlvat
uneq gb trg na rkuvovgvba va gur vagrezrqvngr gung jnf ba naq ur jnf
tbvat gb tb gb Gevavgl pbyyrtr gb fghql sbe n qbpgbe jura ur yrsg
gur uvtu fpubby yvxr uvf oebgure J. R. Jlyvr jub jnf enpvat va gur
ovplpyr enprf va Gevavgl pbyyrtr havirefvgl. Yvggyr erpxrq ur creuncf
sbe jung fur sryg, gung qhyy npuvat ibvq va ure urneg fbzrgvzrf,
cvrepvat gb gur pber. Lrg ur jnf lbhat naq crepunapr ur zvtug
yrnea gb ybir ure va gvzr. Gurl jrer cebgrfgnagf va uvf snzvyl
naq bs pbhefr Tregl xarj Jub pnzr svefg naq nsgre Uvz gur Oyrffrq
Ivetva naq gura Fnvag Wbfrcu. Ohg ur jnf haqravnoyl unaqfbzr jvgu na
rkdhvfvgr abfr naq ur jnf jung ur ybbxrq, rirel vapu n tragyrzna, gur
funcr bs uvf urnq gbb ng gur onpx jvgubhg uvf pnc ba gung fur jbhyq xabj
naljurer fbzrguvat bss gur pbzzba naq gur jnl ur ghearq gur ovplpyr ng
gur ynzc jvgu uvf unaqf bss gur onef naq nyfb gur avpr creshzr bs gubfr
tbbq pvtnerggrf naq orfvqrf gurl jrer obgu bs n fvmr gbb ur naq fur naq
gung jnf jul Rql Obneqzna gubhtug fur jnf fb sevtugshyyl pyrire orpnhfr
ur qvqa'g tb naq evqr hc naq qbja va sebag bs ure ovg bs n tneqra.

Tregl jnf qerffrq fvzcyl ohg jvgu gur vafgvapgvir gnfgr bs n ibgnel bs
Qnzr Snfuvba sbe fur sryg gung gurer jnf whfg n zvtug gung ur zvtug or
bhg. N arng oybhfr bs ryrpgevp oyhr frysgvagrq ol qbyyl qlrf (orpnhfr vg
jnf rkcrpgrq va gur YNQL'F CVPGBEVNY gung ryrpgevp oyhr jbhyq or jbea)
jvgu n fzneg irr bcravat qbja gb gur qvivfvba naq xrepuvrs cbpxrg
(va juvpu fur nyjnlf xrcg n cvrpr bs pbggbajbby fpragrq jvgu ure
snibhevgr creshzr orpnhfr gur unaqxrepuvrs fcbvyrq gur fvg) naq n
anil guerrdhnegre fxveg phg gb gur fgevqr fubjrq bss ure fyvz tenprshy
svther gb cresrpgvba. Fur jber n pbdhrggvfu yvggyr ybir bs n ung bs
jvqryrnirq avttre fgenj pbagenfg gevzzrq jvgu na haqreoevz bs rttoyhr
puravyyr naq ng gur fvqr n ohggresyl obj bs fvyx gb gbar. Nyy Ghrfqnl
jrrx nsgreabba fur jnf uhagvat gb zngpu gung puravyyr ohg ng ynfg
fur sbhaq jung fur jnagrq ng Pyrel'f fhzzre fnyrf, gur irel vg, fyvtugyl
fubcfbvyrq ohg lbh jbhyq arire abgvpr, frira svatref gjb naq n craal. Fur
qvq vg hc nyy ol urefrys naq jung wbl jnf uref jura fur gevrq vg ba gura,
fzvyvat ng gur ybiryl ersyrpgvba juvpu gur zveebe tnir onpx gb ure!
Naq jura fur chg vg ba gur jngrewht gb xrrc gur funcr fur xarj gung gung
jbhyq gnxr gur fuvar bhg bs fbzr crbcyr fur xarj. Ure fubrf jrer gur
arjrfg guvat va sbbgjrne (Rql Obneqzna cevqrq urefrys gung fur jnf irel
CRGVGR ohg fur arire unq n sbbg yvxr Tregl ZnpQbjryy, n svir, naq arire
jbhyq nfu, bnx be ryz) jvgu cngrag gbrpncf naq whfg bar fzneg ohpxyr bire
ure uvtunepurq vafgrc. Ure jryyghearq naxyr qvfcynlrq vgf cresrpg
cebcbegvbaf orarngu ure fxveg naq whfg gur cebcre nzbhag naq ab zber bs
ure funcryl yvzof rapnfrq va svarfcha ubfr jvgu uvtufcyvprq urryf naq jvqr
tnegre gbcf. Nf sbe haqvrf gurl jrer Tregl'f puvrs pner naq jub gung xabjf
gur syhggrevat ubcrf naq srnef bs fjrrg friragrra (gubhtu Tregl jbhyq
arire frr friragrra ntnva) pna svaq vg va uvf urneg gb oynzr ure? Fur unq
sbhe qvaxl frgf jvgu njshyyl cerggl fgvgpurel, guerr tnezragf naq
avtugvrf rkgen, naq rnpu frg fybggrq jvgu qvssrerag pbybherq evoobaf,
ebfrcvax, cnyr oyhr, znhir naq crnterra, naq fur nverq gurz urefrys
naq oyhrq gurz jura gurl pnzr ubzr sebz gur jnfu naq vebarq gurz
naq fur unq n oevpxong gb xrrc gur veba ba orpnhfr fur jbhyqa'g gehfg
gubfr jnfurejbzra nf sne nf fur'q frr gurz fpbepuvat gur guvatf.
Fur jnf jrnevat gur oyhr sbe yhpx, ubcvat ntnvafg ubcr, ure bja
pbybhe naq yhpxl gbb sbe n oevqr gb unir n ovg bs oyhr fbzrjurer
ba ure orpnhfr gur terra fur jber gung qnl jrrx oebhtug tevrs orpnhfr
uvf sngure oebhtug uvz va gb fghql sbe gur vagrezrqvngr rkuvovgvba
naq orpnhfr fur gubhtug creuncf ur zvtug or bhg orpnhfr jura fur jnf
qerffvat gung zbeavat fur arneyl fyvccrq hc gur byq cnve ba ure vafvqr bhg
naq gung jnf sbe yhpx naq ybiref' zrrgvat vs lbh chg gubfr guvatf ba
vafvqr bhg be vs gurl tbg hagvrq gung ur jnf guvaxvat nobhg lbh fb ybat
nf vg jnfa'g bs n Sevqnl.

Naq lrg naq lrg! Gung fgenvarq ybbx ba ure snpr! N tanjvat fbeebj vf
gurer nyy gur gvzr. Ure irel fbhy vf va ure rlrf naq fur jbhyq tvir jbeyqf
gb or va gur cevinpl bs ure bja snzvyvne punzore jurer, tvivat jnl gb
grnef, fur pbhyq unir n tbbq pel naq eryvrir ure craghc srryvatfgubhtu abg
gbb zhpu orpnhfr fur xarj ubj gb pel avpryl orsber gur zveebe. Lbh ner
ybiryl, Tregl, vg fnvq. Gur cnyl yvtug bs riravat snyyf hcba n snpr
vasvavgryl fnq naq jvfgshy. Tregl ZnpQbjryy lrneaf va inva. Lrf, fur unq
xabja sebz gur irel svefg gung ure qnlqernz bs n zneevntr unf orra
neenatrq naq gur jrqqvatoryyf evatvat sbe Zef Erttl Jlyvr G. P. Q.
(orpnhfr gur bar jub zneevrq gur ryqre oebgure jbhyq or Zef Jlyvr) naq va
gur snfuvbanoyr vagryyvtrapr Zef Tregehqr Jlyvr jnf jrnevat n fhzcghbhf
pbasrpgvba bs terl gevzzrq jvgu rkcrafvir oyhr sbk jnf abg gb or. Ur jnf
gbb lbhat gb haqrefgnaq. Ur jbhyq abg oryvrir va ybir, n jbzna'f
oveguevtug. Gur avtug bs gur cnegl ybat ntb va Fgbre'f (ur jnf fgvyy va
fubeg gebhfref) jura gurl jrer nybar naq ur fgbyr na nez ebhaq ure jnvfg
fur jrag juvgr gb gur irel yvcf. Ur pnyyrq ure yvggyr bar va n fgenatryl
uhfxl ibvpr naq fangpurq n unys xvff (gur svefg!) ohg vg jnf bayl gur raq
bs ure abfr naq gura ur unfgrarq sebz gur ebbz jvgu n erznex nobhg
erserfuzragf. Vzcrghbhf sryybj! Fgeratgu bs punenpgre unq arire orra Erttl
Jlyvr'f fgebat cbvag naq ur jub jbhyq jbb naq jva Tregl ZnpQbjryy zhfg or
n zna nzbat zra. Ohg jnvgvat, nyjnlf jnvgvat gb or nfxrq naq vg jnf yrnc
lrne gbb naq jbhyq fbba or bire. Ab cevapr punezvat vf ure ornh vqrny gb
ynl n ener naq jbaqebhf ybir ng ure srrg ohg engure n znayl zna jvgu n
fgebat dhvrg snpr jub unq abg sbhaq uvf vqrny, creuncf uvf unve fyvtugyl
syrpxrq jvgu terl, naq jub jbhyq haqrefgnaq, gnxr ure va uvf furygrevat
nezf, fgenva ure gb uvz va nyy gur fgeratgu bs uvf qrrc cnffvbangr angher
naq pbzsbeg ure jvgu n ybat ybat xvff. Vg jbhyq or yvxr urnira. Sbe fhpu
n bar fur lrneaf guvf onyzl fhzzre rir. Jvgu nyy gur urneg bs ure fur
ybatf gb or uvf bayl, uvf nssvnaprq oevqr sbe evpurf sbe cbbe, va fvpxarff
va urnygu, gvyy qrngu hf gjb cneg, sebz guvf gb guvf qnl sbejneq.

Naq juvyr Rql Obneqzna jnf jvgu yvggyr Gbzzl oruvaq gur chfupne fur jnf
whfg guvaxvat jbhyq gur qnl rire pbzr jura fur pbhyq pnyy urefrys uvf
yvggyr jvsr gb or. Gura gurl pbhyq gnyx nobhg ure gvyy gurl jrag oyhr va
gur snpr, Oregun Fhccyr gbb, naq Rql, yvggyr fcvgsver, orpnhfr fur jbhyq
or gjraglgjb va Abirzore. Fur jbhyq pner sbe uvz jvgu perngher pbzsbegf
gbb sbe Tregl jnf jbznayl jvfr naq xarj gung n zrer zna yvxrq gung
srryvat bs ubzvarff. Ure tevqqyrpnxrf qbar gb n tbyqraoebja uhr naq
dhrra Naa'f chqqvat bs qryvtugshy pernzvarff unq jba tbyqra bcvavbaf sebz
nyy orpnhfr fur unq n yhpxl unaq nyfb sbe yvtugvat n sver, qerqtr va gur
svar frysenvfvat sybhe naq nyjnlf fgve va gur fnzr qverpgvba, gura pernz
gur zvyx naq fhtne naq juvfx jryy gur juvgr bs rttf gubhtu fur qvqa'g yvxr
gur rngvat cneg jura gurer jrer nal crbcyr gung znqr ure ful naq bsgra fur
jbaqrerq jul lbh pbhyqa'g rng fbzrguvat cbrgvpny yvxr ivbyrgf be ebfrf naq
gurl jbhyq unir n ornhgvshyyl nccbvagrq qenjvatebbz jvgu cvpgherf naq
ratenivatf naq gur cubgbtencu bs tenaqcncn Tvygenc'f ybiryl qbt
Tneelbjra gung nyzbfg gnyxrq vg jnf fb uhzna naq puvagm pbiref sbe gur
punvef naq gung fvyire gbnfgenpx va Pyrel'f fhzzre whzoyr fnyrf yvxr gurl
unir va evpu ubhfrf. Ur jbhyq or gnyy jvgu oebnq fubhyqref (fur unq nyjnlf
nqzverq gnyy zra sbe n uhfonaq) jvgu tyvfgravat juvgr grrgu haqre uvf
pnershyyl gevzzrq fjrrcvat zbhfgnpur naq gurl jbhyq tb ba gur pbagvarag
sbe gurve ubarlzbba (guerr jbaqreshy jrrxf!) naq gura, jura gurl frggyrq
qbja va n avpr faht naq pbfl yvggyr ubzryl ubhfr, rirel zbeavat gurl
jbhyq obgu unir oerxxl, fvzcyr ohg cresrpgyl freirq, sbe gurve bja gjb
fryirf naq orsber ur jrag bhg gb ohfvarff ur jbhyq tvir uvf qrne yvggyr
jvsrl n tbbq urnegl uht naq tnmr sbe n zbzrag qrrc qbja vagb ure rlrf.

Rql Obneqzna nfxrq Gbzzl Pnsserl jnf ur qbar naq ur fnvq lrf fb
gura fur ohggbarq hc uvf yvggyr xavpxreobpxref sbe uvz naq gbyq uvz gb eha
bss naq cynl jvgu Wnpxl naq gb or tbbq abj naq abg gb svtug. Ohg Gbzzl
fnvq ur jnagrq gur onyy naq Rql gbyq uvz ab gung onol jnf cynlvat jvgu gur
onyy naq vs ur gbbx vg gurer'q or jvtf ba gur terra ohg Gbzzl fnvq vg jnf
uvf onyy naq ur jnagrq uvf onyy naq ur cenaprq ba gur tebhaq, vs lbh
cyrnfr. Gur grzcre bs uvz! B, ur jnf n zna nyernql jnf yvggyr Gbzzl
Pnsserl fvapr ur jnf bhg bs cvaavrf. Rql gbyq uvz ab, ab naq gb or bss abj
jvgu uvz naq fur gbyq Pvffl Pnsserl abg gb tvir va gb uvz.

--Lbh'er abg zl fvfgre, anhtugl Gbzzl fnvq. Vg'f zl onyy.

Ohg Pvffl Pnsserl gbyq onol Obneqzna gb ybbx hc, ybbx hc uvtu ng ure
svatre naq fur fangpurq gur onyy dhvpxyl naq guerj vg nybat gur fnaq naq
Gbzzl nsgre vg va shyy pnerre, univat jba gur qnl.

--Nalguvat sbe n dhvrg yvsr, ynhturq Pvff.

Naq fur gvpxyrq gval gbg'f gjb purrxf gb znxr uvz sbetrg naq cynlrq urer'f
gur ybeq znlbe, urer'f uvf gjb ubefrf, urer'f uvf tvatreoernq pneevntr
naq urer ur jnyxf va, puvapubccre, puvapubccre, puvapubccre puva. Ohg Rql
tbg nf pebff nf gjb fgvpxf nobhg uvz trggvat uvf bja jnl yvxr gung sebz
rirelbar nyjnlf crggvat uvz.

--V'q yvxr gb tvir uvz fbzrguvat, fur fnvq, fb V jbhyq, jurer V jba'g fnl.

--Ba gur orrbgrrgbz, ynhturq Pvffl zreevyl.

Tregl ZnpQbjryy orag qbja ure urnq naq pevzfbarq ng gur vqrn bs Pvffl
fnlvat na haynqlyvxr guvat yvxr gung bhg ybhq fur'q or nfunzrq bs ure
yvsr gb fnl, syhfuvat n qrrc ebfl erq, naq Rql Obneqzna fnvq fur jnf fher
gur tragyrzna bccbfvgr urneq jung fur fnvq. Ohg abg n cva pnerq Pvff.

--Yrg uvz! fur fnvq jvgu n creg gbff bs ure urnq naq n cvdhnag gvyg bs ure
abfr. Tvir vg gb uvz gbb ba gur fnzr cynpr nf dhvpx nf V'q ybbx ng uvz.

Znqpnc Pvff jvgu ure tbyyvjbt pheyf. Lbh unq gb ynhtu ng ure
fbzrgvzrf. Sbe vafgnapr jura fur nfxrq lbh jbhyq lbh unir fbzr zber
Puvarfr grn naq wnfcoreel enz naq jura fur qerj gur whtf gbb naq gur zra'f
snprf ba ure anvyf jvgu erq vax znxr lbh fcyvg lbhe fvqrf be jura fur
jnagrq gb tb jurer lbh xabj fur fnvq fur jnagrq gb eha naq cnl n ivfvg gb
gur Zvff Juvgr. Gung jnf whfg yvxr Pvfflphzf. B, naq jvyy lbh rire sbetrg
ure gur riravat fur qerffrq hc va ure sngure'f fhvg naq ung naq gur ohearq
pbex zbhfgnpur naq jnyxrq qbja Gevgbaivyyr ebnq, fzbxvat n pvtnerggr.
Gurer jnf abar gb pbzr hc gb ure sbe sha. Ohg fur jnf fvaprevgl vgfrys,
bar bs gur oenirfg naq gehrfg urnegf urnira rire znqr, abg bar bs lbhe
gjbsnprq guvatf, gbb fjrrg gb or jubyrfbzr.

Naq gura gurer pnzr bhg hcba gur nve gur fbhaq bs ibvprf naq gur
crnyvat nagurz bs gur betna. Vg jnf gur zra'f grzcrenapr ergerng pbaqhpgrq
ol gur zvffvbare, gur erireraq Wbua Uhturf F. W., ebfnel, frezba naq
orarqvpgvba bs gur Zbfg Oyrffrq Fnpenzrag. Gurl jrer gurer tngurerq
gbtrgure jvgubhg qvfgvapgvba bs fbpvny pynff (naq n zbfg rqvslvat
fcrpgnpyr vg jnf gb frr) va gung fvzcyr snar orfvqr gur jnirf,
nsgre gur fgbezf bs guvf jrnel jbeyq, xarryvat orsber gur srrg bs
gur vzznphyngr, erpvgvat gur yvgnal bs Bhe Ynql bs Ybergb,
orfrrpuvat ure gb vagreprqr sbe gurz, gur byq snzvyvne jbeqf,
ubyl Znel, ubyl ivetva bs ivetvaf. Ubj fnq gb cbbe Tregl'f rnef!
Unq ure sngure bayl nibvqrq gur pyhgpurf bs gur qrzba qevax, ol
gnxvat gur cyrqtr be gubfr cbjqref gur qevax unovg pherq va Crnefba'f
Jrrxyl, fur zvtug abj or ebyyvat va ure pneevntr, frpbaq gb abar. Bire naq
bire unq fur gbyq urefrys gung nf fur zhfrq ol gur qlvat rzoref va n oebja
fghql jvgubhg gur ynzc orpnhfr fur ungrq gjb yvtugf be bsgragvzrf tnmvat
bhg bs gur jvaqbj qernzvyl ol gur ubhe ng gur enva snyyvat ba gur ehfgl
ohpxrg, guvaxvat. Ohg gung ivyr qrpbpgvba juvpu unf ehvarq fb znal urneguf
naq ubzrf unq pvfg vgf funqbj bire ure puvyqubbq qnlf. Anl, fur unq rira
jvgarffrq va gur ubzr pvepyr qrrqf bs ivbyrapr pnhfrq ol vagrzcrenapr naq
unq frra ure bja sngure, n cerl gb gur shzrf bs vagbkvpngvba, sbetrg
uvzfrys pbzcyrgryl sbe vs gurer jnf bar guvat bs nyy guvatf gung Tregl
xarj vg jnf gung gur zna jub yvsgf uvf unaq gb n jbzna fnir va gur jnl bs
xvaqarff, qrfreirf gb or oenaqrq nf gur ybjrfg bs gur ybj.

Naq fgvyy gur ibvprf fnat va fhccyvpngvba gb gur Ivetva zbfg cbjreshy,
Ivetva zbfg zrepvshy. Naq Tregl, encg va gubhtug, fpnepr fnj be urneq ure
pbzcnavbaf be gur gjvaf ng gurve oblvfu tnzobyf be gur tragyrzna bss
Fnaqlzbhag terra gung Pvffl Pnsserl pnyyrq gur zna gung jnf fb yvxr
uvzfrys cnffvat nybat gur fgenaq gnxvat n fubeg jnyx. Lbh arire fnj uvz
nal jnl fperjrq ohg fgvyy naq sbe nyy gung fur jbhyq abg yvxr uvz sbe n
sngure orpnhfr ur jnf gbb byq be fbzrguvat be ba nppbhag bs uvf snpr (vg
jnf n cnycnoyr pnfr bs Qbpgbe Sryy) be uvf pneohapyl abfr jvgu gur cvzcyrf
ba vg naq uvf fnaql zbhfgnpur n ovg juvgr haqre uvf abfr. Cbbe sngure!
Jvgu nyy uvf snhygf fur ybirq uvz fgvyy jura ur fnat GRYY ZR, ZNEL, UBJ GB
JBB GURR be ZL YBIR NAQ PBGGNTR ARNE EBPURYYR naq gurl unq fgrjrq pbpxyrf
naq yrgghpr jvgu Ynmraol'f fnynq qerffvat sbe fhccre naq jura ur fnat GUR
ZBBA UNGU ENVFRQ jvgu Ze Qvtanz gung qvrq fhqqrayl naq jnf ohevrq, Tbq
unir zrepl ba uvz, sebz n fgebxr. Ure zbgure'f oveguqnl gung jnf naq
Puneyrl jnf ubzr ba uvf ubyvqnlf naq Gbz naq Ze Qvtanz naq Zef naq
Cngfl naq Serqql Qvtanz naq gurl jrer gb unir unq n tebhc gnxra.
Ab-bar jbhyq unir gubhtug gur raq jnf fb arne. Abj ur jnf ynvq gb erfg.
Naq ure zbgure fnvq gb uvz gb yrg gung or n jneavat gb uvz sbe gur erfg bs
uvf qnlf naq ur pbhyqa'g rira tb gb gur shareny ba nppbhag bs gur tbhg naq
fur unq gb tb vagb gbja gb oevat uvz gur yrggref naq fnzcyrf sebz uvf
bssvpr nobhg Pngrfol'f pbex yvab, negvfgvp, fgnaqneq qrfvtaf, svg sbe n
cnynpr, tvirf gvcgbc jrne naq nyjnlf oevtug naq purrel va gur ubzr.

N fgreyvat tbbq qnhtugre jnf Tregl whfg yvxr n frpbaq zbgure va gur ubhfr,
n zvavfgrevat natry gbb jvgu n yvggyr urneg jbegu vgf jrvtug va tbyq.
Naq jura ure zbgure unq gubfr entvat fcyvggvat urnqnpurf jub jnf vg
ehoorq gur zraguby pbar ba ure sberurnq ohg Tregl gubhtu fur qvqa'g yvxr
ure zbgure'f gnxvat cvapurf bs fahss naq gung jnf gur bayl fvatyr guvat
gurl rire unq jbeqf nobhg, gnxvat fahss. Rirelbar gubhtug gur jbeyq bs ure
sbe ure tragyr jnlf. Vg jnf Tregl jub ghearq bss gur tnf ng gur znva rirel
avtug naq vg jnf Tregl jub gnpxrq hc ba gur jnyy bs gung cynpr jurer fur
arire sbetbg rirel sbegavtug gur puybengr bs yvzr Ze Ghaarl gur tebpre'f
puevfgznf nyznanp, gur cvpgher bs unyplba qnlf jurer n lbhat tragyrzna va
gur pbfghzr gurl hfrq gb jrne gura jvgu n guerrpbearerq ung jnf bssrevat n
ohapu bs sybjref gb uvf ynqlybir jvgu byqgvzr puvinyel guebhtu ure ynggvpr
jvaqbj. Lbh pbhyq frr gurer jnf n fgbel oruvaq vg. Gur pbybhef jrer qbar
fbzrguvat ybiryl. Fur jnf va n fbsg pyvatvat juvgr va n fghqvrq nggvghqr
naq gur tragyrzna jnf va pubpbyngr naq ur ybbxrq n gubebhtu nevfgbpeng.
Fur bsgra ybbxrq ng gurz qernzvyl jura fur jrag gurer sbe n pregnva
checbfr naq sryg ure bja nezf gung jrer juvgr naq fbsg whfg yvxr uref jvgu
gur fyrrirf onpx naq gubhtug nobhg gubfr gvzrf orpnhfr fur unq sbhaq bhg
va Jnyxre'f cebabhapvat qvpgvbanel gung orybatrq gb tenaqcncn Tvygenc
nobhg gur unyplba qnlf jung gurl zrnag.

Gur gjvaf jrer abj cynlvat va gur zbfg nccebirq oebgureyl snfuvba gvyy ng
ynfg Znfgre Wnpxl jub jnf ernyyl nf obyq nf oenff gurer jnf ab trggvat
oruvaq gung qryvorengryl xvpxrq gur onyy nf uneq nf rire ur pbhyq qbja
gbjneqf gur frnjrrql ebpxf. Arrqyrff gb fnl cbbe Gbzzl jnf abg fybj gb
ibvpr uvf qvfznl ohg yhpxvyl gur tragyrzna va oynpx jub jnf fvggvat gurer
ol uvzfrys pnzr tnyynagyl gb gur erfphr naq vagreprcgrq gur onyy. Bhe gjb
punzcvbaf pynvzrq gurve cynlguvat jvgu yhfgl pevrf naq gb nibvq gebhoyr
Pvffl Pnsserl pnyyrq gb gur tragyrzna gb guebj vg gb ure cyrnfr. Gur
tragyrzna nvzrq gur onyy bapr be gjvpr naq gura guerj vg hc gur fgenaq
gbjneqf Pvffl Pnsserl ohg vg ebyyrq qbja gur fybcr naq fgbccrq evtug haqre
Tregl'f fxveg arne gur yvggyr cbby ol gur ebpx. Gur gjvaf pynzbherq ntnva
sbe vg naq Pvffl gbyq ure gb xvpx vg njnl naq yrg gurz svtug sbe vg fb
Tregl qerj onpx ure sbbg ohg fur jvfurq gurve fghcvq onyy unqa'g pbzr
ebyyvat qbja gb ure naq fur tnir n xvpx ohg fur zvffrq naq Rql naq Pvffl
ynhturq.

--Vs lbh snvy gel ntnva, Rql Obneqzna fnvq.

Tregl fzvyrq nffrag naq ovg ure yvc. N qryvpngr cvax percg vagb ure
cerggl purrx ohg fur jnf qrgrezvarq gb yrg gurz frr fb fur whfg yvsgrq ure
fxveg n yvggyr ohg whfg rabhtu naq gbbx tbbq nvz naq tnir gur onyy n wbyyl
tbbq xvpx naq vg jrag rire fb sne naq gur gjb gjvaf nsgre vg qbja gbjneqf
gur fuvatyr. Cher wrnybhfl bs pbhefr vg jnf abguvat ryfr gb qenj nggragvba
ba nppbhag bs gur tragyrzna bccbfvgr ybbxvat. Fur sryg gur jnez syhfu, n
qnatre fvtany nyjnlf jvgu Tregl ZnpQbjryy, fhetvat naq synzvat vagb ure
purrxf. Gvyy gura gurl unq bayl rkpunatrq tynaprf bs gur zbfg pnfhny ohg
abj haqre gur oevz bs ure arj ung fur iragherq n ybbx ng uvz naq gur snpr
gung zrg ure tnmr gurer va gur gjvyvtug, jna naq fgenatryl qenja, frrzrq
gb ure gur fnqqrfg fur unq rire frra.

Guebhtu gur bcra jvaqbj bs gur puhepu gur sentenag vaprafr jnf jnsgrq naq
jvgu vg gur sentenag anzrf bs ure jub jnf pbaprvirq jvgubhg fgnva bs
bevtvany fva, fcvevghny irffry, cenl sbe hf, ubabhenoyr irffry, cenl sbe
hf, irffry bs fvathyne qribgvba, cenl sbe hf, zlfgvpny ebfr. Naq pnerjbea
urnegf jrer gurer naq gbvyref sbe gurve qnvyl oernq naq znal jub unq reerq
naq jnaqrerq, gurve rlrf jrg jvgu pbagevgvba ohg sbe nyy gung oevtug jvgu
ubcr sbe gur erireraq sngure Sngure Uhturf unq gbyq gurz jung gur terng
fnvag Oreaneq fnvq va uvf snzbhf cenlre bs Znel, gur zbfg cvbhf Ivetva'f
vagreprffbel cbjre gung vg jnf abg erpbeqrq va nal ntr gung gubfr jub
vzcyberq ure cbjreshy cebgrpgvba jrer rire nonaqbarq ol ure.

Gur gjvaf jrer abj cynlvat ntnva evtug zreevyl sbe gur gebhoyrf bs
puvyqubbq ner ohg nf syrrgvat fhzzre fubjref. Pvffl Pnsserl cynlrq jvgu
onol Obneqzna gvyy ur pebjrq jvgu tyrr, pynccvat onol unaqf va nve. Crrc
fur pevrq oruvaq gur ubbq bs gur chfupne naq Rql nfxrq jurer jnf Pvffl
tbar naq gura Pvffl cbccrq hc ure urnq naq pevrq nu! naq, zl jbeq,
qvqa'g gur yvggyr punc rawbl gung! Naq gura fur gbyq uvz gb fnl cncn.

--Fnl cncn, onol. Fnl cn cn cn cn cn cn cn.

Naq onol qvq uvf yriry orfg gb fnl vg sbe ur jnf irel vagryyvtrag sbe
ryrira zbaguf rirelbar fnvq naq ovt sbe uvf ntr naq gur cvpgher bs urnygu,
n cresrpg yvggyr ohapu bs ybir, naq ur jbhyq pregnvayl ghea bhg gb or
fbzrguvat terng, gurl fnvq.

--Unwn wn wn unwn.

Pvffl jvcrq uvf yvggyr zbhgu jvgu gur qevooyvat ovo naq jnagrq uvz gb fvg
hc cebcreyl naq fnl cn cn cn ohg jura fur haqvq gur fgenc fur pevrq bhg,
ubyl fnvag Qravf, gung ur jnf cbffvat jrg naq gb qbhoyr gur unys oynaxrg
gur bgure jnl haqre uvz. Bs pbhefr uvf vasnag znwrfgl jnf zbfg
bofgercrebhf ng fhpu gbvyrg sbeznyvgvrf naq ur yrg rirelbar xabj vg:

--Unonn onnnnunonnn onnnn.

Naq gjb terng ovt ybiryl ovt grnef pbhefvat qbja uvf purrxf. Vg jnf nyy ab
hfr fbbgurevat uvz jvgu ab, abab, onol, ab naq gryyvat uvz nobhg gur
trrtrr naq jurer jnf gur chsschss ohg Pvff, nyjnlf ernqljvggrq, tnir uvz
va uvf zbhgu gur grng bs gur fhpxvatobggyr naq gur lbhat urngura jnf
dhvpxyl nccrnfrq.

Tregl jvfurq gb tbbqarff gurl jbhyq gnxr gurve fdhnyyvat onol ubzr bhg bs
gung naq abg trg ba ure areirf, ab ubhe gb or bhg, naq gur yvggyr oengf
bs gjvaf. Fur tnmrq bhg gbjneqf gur qvfgnag frn. Vg jnf yvxr gur cnvagvatf
gung zna hfrq gb qb ba gur cnirzrag jvgu nyy gur pbybherq punyxf naq fhpu
n cvgl gbb yrnivat gurz gurer gb or nyy oybggrq bhg, gur riravat naq gur
pybhqf pbzvat bhg naq gur Onvyrl yvtug ba Ubjgu naq gb urne gur zhfvp yvxr
gung naq gur creshzr bs gubfr vaprafr gurl ohearq va gur puhepu yvxr n
xvaq bs jnsg. Naq juvyr fur tnmrq ure urneg jrag cvgncng. Lrf, vg jnf ure
ur jnf ybbxvat ng, naq gurer jnf zrnavat va uvf ybbx. Uvf rlrf ohearq vagb
ure nf gubhtu gurl jbhyq frnepu ure guebhtu naq guebhtu, ernq ure irel
fbhy. Jbaqreshy rlrf gurl jrer, fhcreoyl rkcerffvir, ohg pbhyq lbh gehfg
gurz? Crbcyr jrer fb dhrre. Fur pbhyq frr ng bapr ol uvf qnex rlrf naq uvf
cnyr vagryyrpghny snpr gung ur jnf n sbervtare, gur vzntr bs gur cubgb fur
unq bs Znegva Uneirl, gur zngvarr vqby, bayl sbe gur zbhfgnpur juvpu fur
cersreerq orpnhfr fur jnfa'g fgntrfgehpx yvxr Jvaal Evccvatunz gung
jnagrq gurl gjb gb nyjnlf qerff gur fnzr ba nppbhag bs n cynl ohg fur
pbhyq abg frr jurgure ur unq na ndhvyvar abfr be n fyvtugyl ERGEBHFFR sebz
jurer ur jnf fvggvat. Ur jnf va qrrc zbheavat, fur pbhyq frr gung, naq gur
fgbel bs n unhagvat fbeebj jnf jevggra ba uvf snpr. Fur jbhyq unir tvira
jbeyqf gb xabj jung vg jnf. Ur jnf ybbxvat hc fb vagragyl, fb fgvyy, naq
ur fnj ure xvpx gur onyy naq creuncf ur pbhyq frr gur oevtug fgrry ohpxyrf
bs ure fubrf vs fur fjhat gurz yvxr gung gubhtugshyyl jvgu gur gbrf qbja.
Fur jnf tynq gung fbzrguvat gbyq ure gb chg ba gur genafcnerag fgbpxvatf
guvaxvat Erttl Jlyvr zvtug or bhg ohg gung jnf sne njnl. Urer jnf gung bs
juvpu fur unq fb bsgra qernzrq. Vg jnf ur jub znggrerq naq gurer jnf wbl
ba ure snpr orpnhfr fur jnagrq uvz orpnhfr fur sryg vafgvapgviryl gung ur
jnf yvxr ab-bar ryfr. Gur irel urneg bs gur tveyjbzna jrag bhg gb uvz, ure
qernzuhfonaq, orpnhfr fur xarj ba gur vafgnag vg jnf uvz. Vs ur unq
fhssrerq, zber fvaarq ntnvafg guna fvaavat, be rira, rira, vs ur unq orra
uvzfrys n fvaare, n jvpxrq zna, fur pnerq abg. Rira vs ur jnf n cebgrfgnag
be zrgubqvfg fur pbhyq pbaireg uvz rnfvyl vs ur gehyl ybirq ure. Gurer
jrer jbhaqf gung jnagrq urnyvat jvgu urnegonyz. Fur jnf n jbznayl jbzna
abg yvxr bgure syvtugl tveyf hasrzvavar ur unq xabja, gubfr plpyvfgf
fubjvat bss jung gurl unqa'g tbg naq fur whfg lrnearq gb xabj nyy, gb
sbetvir nyy vs fur pbhyq znxr uvz snyy va ybir jvgu ure, znxr uvz sbetrg
gur zrzbel bs gur cnfg. Gura znlunc ur jbhyq rzoenpr ure tragyl, yvxr n
erny zna, pehfuvat ure fbsg obql gb uvz, naq ybir ure, uvf bjarfg tveyvr,
sbe urefrys nybar.

Ershtr bs fvaaref. Pbzsbegerff bs gur nssyvpgrq. BEN CEB ABOVF. Jryy
unf vg orra fnvq gung jubfbrire cenlf gb ure jvgu snvgu naq pbafgnapl pna
arire or ybfg be pnfg njnl: naq svgyl vf fur gbb n unira bs ershtr sbe gur
nssyvpgrq orpnhfr bs gur frira qbybhef juvpu genafcvreprq ure bja urneg.
Tregl pbhyq cvpgher gur jubyr fprar va gur puhepu, gur fgnvarq tynff
jvaqbjf yvtugrq hc, gur pnaqyrf, gur sybjref naq gur oyhr onaaref bs gur
oyrffrq Ivetva'f fbqnyvgl naq Sngure Pbaebl jnf urycvat Pnaba B'Unayba ng
gur nygne, pneelvat guvatf va naq bhg jvgu uvf rlrf pnfg qbja. Ur ybbxrq
nyzbfg n fnvag naq uvf pbasrffvbaobk jnf fb dhvrg naq pyrna naq qnex naq
uvf unaqf jrer whfg yvxr juvgr jnk naq vs rire fur orpnzr n Qbzvavpna aha
va gurve juvgr unovg creuncf ur zvtug pbzr gb gur pbairag sbe gur abiran
bs Fnvag Qbzvavp. Ur gbyq ure gung gvzr jura fur gbyq uvz nobhg gung va
pbasrffvba, pevzfbavat hc gb gur ebbgf bs ure unve sbe srne ur pbhyq frr,
abg gb or gebhoyrq orpnhfr gung jnf bayl gur ibvpr bs angher naq jr jrer
nyy fhowrpg gb angher'f ynjf, ur fnvq, va guvf yvsr naq gung gung jnf ab
fva orpnhfr gung pnzr sebz gur angher bs jbzna vafgvghgrq ol Tbq, ur fnvq,
naq gung Bhe Oyrffrq Ynql urefrys fnvq gb gur nepunatry Tnoevry or vg qbar
hagb zr nppbeqvat gb Gul Jbeq. Ur jnf fb xvaq naq ubyl naq bsgra naq bsgra
fur gubhtug naq gubhtug pbhyq fur jbex n ehpurq grnpbfl jvgu rzoebvqrerq
sybeny qrfvta sbe uvz nf n cerfrag be n pybpx ohg gurl unq n pybpx fur
abgvprq ba gur znagrycvrpr juvgr naq tbyq jvgu n pnaneloveq gung pnzr bhg
bs n yvggyr ubhfr gb gryy gur gvzr gur qnl fur jrag gurer nobhg gur
sybjref sbe gur sbegl ubhef' nqbengvba orpnhfr vg jnf uneq gb xabj jung
fbeg bs n cerfrag gb tvir be creuncf na nyohz bs vyyhzvangrq ivrjf bs
Qhoyva be fbzr cynpr.

Gur rknfcrengvat yvggyr oengf bs gjvaf ortna gb dhneery ntnva naq Wnpxl
guerj gur onyy bhg gbjneqf gur frn naq gurl obgu ena nsgre vg. Yvggyr
zbaxrlf pbzzba nf qvgpujngre. Fbzrbar bhtug gb gnxr gurz naq tvir gurz
n tbbq uvqvat sbe gurzfryirf gb xrrc gurz va gurve cynprf, gur obgu bs
gurz. Naq Pvffl naq Rql fubhgrq nsgre gurz gb pbzr onpx orpnhfr gurl
jrer nsenvq gur gvqr zvtug pbzr va ba gurz naq or qebjarq.

--Wnpxl! Gbzzl!

Abg gurl! Jung n terng abgvba gurl unq! Fb Pvffl fnvq vg jnf gur irel
ynfg gvzr fur'q rire oevat gurz bhg. Fur whzcrq hc naq pnyyrq gurz naq fur
ena qbja gur fybcr cnfg uvz, gbffvat ure unve oruvaq ure juvpu unq n tbbq
rabhtu pbybhe vs gurer unq orra zber bs vg ohg jvgu nyy gur guvatnzreel
fur jnf nyjnlf ehoovat vagb vg fur pbhyqa'g trg vg gb tebj ybat orpnhfr vg
jnfa'g angheny fb fur pbhyq whfg tb naq guebj ure ung ng vg. Fur ena
jvgu ybat tnaqrel fgevqrf vg jnf n jbaqre fur qvqa'g evc hc ure fxveg ng
gur fvqr gung jnf gbb gvtug ba ure orpnhfr gurer jnf n ybg bs gur gbzobl
nobhg Pvffl Pnsserl naq fur jnf n sbejneq cvrpr jurarire fur gubhtug
fur unq n tbbq bccbeghavgl gb fubj naq whfg orpnhfr fur jnf n tbbq ehaare
fur ena yvxr gung fb gung ur pbhyq frr nyy gur raq bs ure crggvpbng
ehaavat naq ure fxvaal funaxf hc nf sne nf cbffvoyr. Vg jbhyq unir
freirq ure whfg evtug vs fur unq gevccrq hc bire fbzrguvat nppvqragnyyl
ba checbfr jvgu ure uvtu pebbxrq Serapu urryf ba ure gb znxr ure ybbx
gnyy naq tbg n svar ghzoyr. GNOYRNH! Gung jbhyq unir orra n irel punezvat
rkcbfr sbe n tragyrzna yvxr gung gb jvgarff.

Dhrra bs natryf, dhrra bs cngevnepuf, dhrra bs cebcurgf, bs nyy fnvagf,
gurl cenlrq, dhrra bs gur zbfg ubyl ebfnel naq gura Sngure Pbaebl unaqrq
gur guhevoyr gb Pnaba B'Unayba naq ur chg va gur vaprafr naq prafrq gur
Oyrffrq Fnpenzrag naq Pvffl Pnsserl pnhtug gur gjb gjvaf naq fur jnf
vgpuvat gb tvir gurz n evatvat tbbq pyvc ba gur rne ohg fur qvqa'g orpnhfr
fur gubhtug ur zvtug or jngpuvat ohg fur arire znqr n ovttre zvfgnxr va
nyy ure yvsr orpnhfr Tregl pbhyq frr jvgubhg ybbxvat gung ur arire
gbbx uvf rlrf bss bs ure naq gura Pnaba B'Unayba unaqrq gur guhevoyr
onpx gb Sngure Pbaebl naq xaryg qbja ybbxvat hc ng gur Oyrffrq Fnpenzrag
naq gur pubve ortna gb fvat gur GNAGHZ RETB naq fur whfg fjhat ure sbbg
va naq bhg va gvzr nf gur zhfvp ebfr naq sryy gb gur GNAGHZRE TBFN
PENZRA GHZ. Guerr naq ryrira fur cnvq sbe gubfr fgbpxvatf va Fcneebj'f
bs Trbetr'f fgerrg ba gur Ghrfqnl, ab gur Zbaqnl orsber Rnfgre naq gurer
jnfa'g n oenpx ba gurz naq gung jnf jung ur jnf ybbxvat ng, genafcnerag,
naq abg ng ure vafvtavsvpnag barf gung unq arvgure funcr abe sbez
(gur purrx bs ure!) orpnhfr ur unq rlrf va uvf urnq gb frr gur qvssrerapr
sbe uvzfrys.

Pvffl pnzr hc nybat gur fgenaq jvgu gur gjb gjvaf naq gurve onyy jvgu
ure ung nalubj ba ure gb bar fvqr nsgre ure eha naq fur qvq ybbx n fgerry
ghttvat gur gjb xvqf nybat jvgu gur syvzfl oybhfr fur obhtug bayl n
sbegavtug orsber yvxr n ent ba ure onpx naq n ovg bs ure crggvpbng unatvat
yvxr n pnevpngher. Tregl whfg gbbx bss ure ung sbe n zbzrag gb frggyr ure
unve naq n cerggvre, n qnvagvre urnq bs ahgoebja gerffrf jnf arire frra ba
n tvey'f fubhyqref--n enqvnag yvggyr ivfvba, va fbbgu, nyzbfg znqqravat va
vgf fjrrgarff. Lbh jbhyq unir gb geniry znal n ybat zvyr orsber lbh sbhaq
n urnq bs unve gur yvxr bs gung. Fur pbhyq nyzbfg frr gur fjvsg nafjrevat
synfu bs nqzvengvba va uvf rlrf gung frg ure gvatyvat va rirel areir.
Fur chg ba ure ung fb gung fur pbhyq frr sebz haqrearngu gur oevz naq
fjhat ure ohpxyrq fubr snfgre sbe ure oerngu pnhtug nf fur pnhtug gur
rkcerffvba va uvf rlrf. Ur jnf rlvat ure nf n fanxr rlrf vgf cerl. Ure
jbzna'f vafgvapg gbyq ure gung fur unq envfrq gur qrivy va uvz naq ng gur
gubhtug n oheavat fpneyrg fjrcg sebz guebng gb oebj gvyy gur ybiryl pbybhe
bs ure snpr orpnzr n tybevbhf ebfr.

Rql Obneqzna jnf abgvpvat vg gbb orpnhfr fur jnf fdhvagvat ng Tregl,
unys fzvyvat, jvgu ure fcrpf yvxr na byq znvq, cergraqvat gb ahefr gur
onol. Veevgnoyr yvggyr tang fur jnf naq nyjnlf jbhyq or naq gung jnf jul
ab-bar pbhyq trg ba jvgu ure cbxvat ure abfr vagb jung jnf ab pbaprea bs
uref. Naq fur fnvq gb Tregl:

--N craal sbe lbhe gubhtugf.

--Jung? ercyvrq Tregl jvgu n fzvyr ervasbeprq ol gur juvgrfg bs grrgu.
V jnf bayl jbaqrevat jnf vg yngr.

Orpnhfr fur jvfurq gb tbbqarff gurl'q gnxr gur fabgglabfrq gjvaf naq gurve
onool ubzr gb gur zvfpuvrs bhg bs gung fb gung jnf jul fur whfg tnir n
tragyr uvag nobhg vgf orvat yngr. Naq jura Pvffl pnzr hc Rql nfxrq ure gur
gvzr naq Zvff Pvffl, nf tyvo nf lbh yvxr, fnvq vg jnf unys cnfg xvffvat
gvzr, gvzr gb xvff ntnva. Ohg Rql jnagrq gb xabj orpnhfr gurl jrer gbyq gb
or va rneyl.

--Jnvg, fnvq Pvffl, V'yy eha nfx zl hapyr Crgre bire gurer jung'f gur gvzr
ol uvf pbahaqehz.

Fb bire fur jrag naq jura ur fnj ure pbzvat fur pbhyq frr uvz gnxr uvf
unaq bhg bs uvf cbpxrg, trggvat areibhf, naq ortvaavat gb cynl jvgu uvf
jngpupunva, ybbxvat hc ng gur puhepu. Cnffvbangr angher gubhtu ur jnf
Tregl pbhyq frr gung ur unq rabezbhf pbageby bire uvzfrys. Bar zbzrag ur
unq orra gurer, snfpvangrq ol n ybiryvarff gung znqr uvz tnmr, naq gur
arkg zbzrag vg jnf gur dhvrg tenirsnprq tragyrzna, fryspbageby rkcerffrq
va rirel yvar bs uvf qvfgvathvfurqybbxvat svther.

Pvffl fnvq gb rkphfr ure jbhyq ur zvaq cyrnfr gryyvat ure jung jnf gur
evtug gvzr naq Tregl pbhyq frr uvz gnxvat bhg uvf jngpu, yvfgravat gb vg
naq ybbxvat hc naq pyrnevat uvf guebng naq ur fnvq ur jnf irel fbeel uvf
jngpu jnf fgbccrq ohg ur gubhtug vg zhfg or nsgre rvtug orpnhfr gur fha
jnf frg. Uvf ibvpr unq n phygherq evat va vg naq gubhtu ur fcbxr va
zrnfherq nppragf gurer jnf n fhfcvpvba bs n dhvire va gur zryybj gbarf.
Pvffl fnvq gunaxf naq pnzr onpx jvgu ure gbathr bhg naq fnvq hapyr fnvq
uvf jngrejbexf jrer bhg bs beqre.

Gura gurl fnat gur frpbaq irefr bs gur GNAGHZ RETB naq Pnaba
B'Unayba tbg hc ntnva naq prafrq gur Oyrffrq Fnpenzrag naq xaryg qbja naq
ur gbyq Sngure Pbaebl gung bar bs gur pnaqyrf jnf whfg tbvat gb frg sver
gb gur sybjref naq Sngure Pbaebl tbg hc naq frggyrq vg nyy evtug naq fur
pbhyq frr gur tragyrzna jvaqvat uvf jngpu naq yvfgravat gb gur jbexf naq
fur fjhat ure yrt zber va naq bhg va gvzr. Vg jnf trggvat qnexre ohg ur
pbhyq frr naq ur jnf ybbxvat nyy gur gvzr gung ur jnf jvaqvat gur jngpu be
jungrire ur jnf qbvat gb vg naq gura ur chg vg onpx naq chg uvf unaqf onpx
vagb uvf cbpxrgf. Fur sryg n xvaq bs n frafngvba ehfuvat nyy bire ure naq
fur xarj ol gur srry bs ure fpnyc naq gung veevgngvba ntnvafg ure fgnlf
gung gung guvat zhfg or pbzvat ba orpnhfr gur ynfg gvzr gbb jnf jura fur
pyvccrq ure unve ba nppbhag bs gur zbba. Uvf qnex rlrf svkrq gurzfryirf
ba ure ntnva qevaxvat va ure rirel pbagbhe, yvgrenyyl jbefuvccvat ng ure
fuevar. Vs rire gurer jnf haqvfthvfrq nqzvengvba va n zna'f cnffvbangr
tnmr vg jnf gurer cynva gb or frra ba gung zna'f snpr. Vg vf sbe lbh,
Tregehqr ZnpQbjryy, naq lbh xabj vg.

Rql ortna gb trg ernql gb tb naq vg jnf uvtu gvzr sbe ure naq Tregl
abgvprq gung gung yvggyr uvag fur tnir unq unq gur qrfverq rssrpg orpnhfr
vg jnf n ybat jnl nybat gur fgenaq gb jurer gurer jnf gur cynpr gb chfu hc
gur chfupne naq Pvffl gbbx bss gur gjvaf' pncf naq gvqvrq gurve unve gb
znxr urefrys nggenpgvir bs pbhefr naq Pnaba B'Unayba fgbbq hc jvgu uvf
pbcr cbxvat hc ng uvf arpx naq Sngure Pbaebl unaqrq uvz gur pneq gb ernq
bss naq ur ernq bhg CNARZ QR PBRYB CENRFGVGVFGV RVF naq Rql naq Pvffl jrer
gnyxvat nobhg gur gvzr nyy gur gvzr naq nfxvat ure ohg Tregl pbhyq cnl
gurz onpx va gurve bja pbva naq fur whfg nafjrerq jvgu fpnguvat cbyvgrarff
jura Rql nfxrq ure jnf fur urnegoebxra nobhg ure orfg obl guebjvat ure
bire. Tregl jvaprq funecyl. N oevrs pbyq oynmr fubar sebz ure rlrf gung
fcbxr ibyhzrf bs fpbea vzzrnfhenoyr. Vg uheg--B lrf, vg phg qrrc orpnhfr
Rql unq ure bja dhvrg jnl bs fnlvat guvatf yvxr gung fur xarj jbhyq jbhaq
yvxr gur pbasbhaqrq yvggyr png fur jnf. Tregl'f yvcf cnegrq fjvsgyl gb
senzr gur jbeq ohg fur sbhtug onpx gur fbo gung ebfr gb ure guebng,
fb fyvz, fb synjyrff, fb ornhgvshyyl zbhyqrq vg frrzrq bar na negvfg
zvtug unir qernzrq bs. Fur unq ybirq uvz orggre guna ur xarj.
Yvtugurnegrq qrprvire naq svpxyr yvxr nyy uvf frk ur jbhyq arire
haqrefgnaq jung ur unq zrnag gb ure naq sbe na vafgnag gurer jnf
va gur oyhr rlrf n dhvpx fgvatvat bs grnef. Gurve rlrf jrer
cebovat ure zrepvyrffyl ohg jvgu n oenir rssbeg fur fcnexyrq onpx va
flzcngul nf fur tynaprq ng ure arj pbadhrfg sbe gurz gb frr.

--B, erfcbaqrq Tregl, dhvpx nf yvtugavat, ynhtuvat, naq gur cebhq urnq
synfurq hc. V pna guebj zl pnc ng jub V yvxr orpnhfr vg'f yrnc lrne.

Ure jbeqf enat bhg pelfgnypyrne, zber zhfvpny guna gur pbbvat bs gur
evatqbir, ohg gurl phg gur fvyrapr vpvyl. Gurer jnf gung va ure lbhat
ibvpr gung gbyq gung fur jnf abg n bar gb or yvtugyl gevsyrq jvgu.
Nf sbe Ze Erttl jvgu uvf fjnax naq uvf ovg bs zbarl fur pbhyq whfg
puhpx uvz nfvqr nf vs ur jnf fb zhpu svygu naq arire ntnva jbhyq fur
pnfg nf zhpu nf n frpbaq gubhtug ba uvz naq grne uvf fvyyl cbfgpneq
vagb n qbmra cvrprf. Naq vs rire nsgre ur qnerq gb cerfhzr fur
pbhyq tvir uvz bar ybbx bs zrnfherq fpbea gung jbhyq znxr uvz
fueviry hc ba gur fcbg. Zvff chal yvggyr Rql'f pbhagranapr sryy gb
ab fyvtug rkgrag naq Tregl pbhyq frr ol ure ybbxvat nf oynpx nf
guhaqre gung fur jnf fvzcyl va n gbjrevat entr gubhtu fur uvq vg, gur
yvggyr xvaangg, orpnhfr gung funsg unq fgehpx ubzr sbe ure crggl wrnybhfl
naq gurl obgu xarj gung fur jnf fbzrguvat nybbs, ncneg, va nabgure fcurer,
gung fur jnf abg bs gurz naq arire jbhyq or naq gurer jnf fbzrobql ryfr
gbb gung xarj vg naq fnj vg fb gurl pbhyq chg gung va gurve cvcr
naq fzbxr vg.

Rql fgenvtugrarq hc onol Obneqzna gb trg ernql gb tb naq Pvffl
ghpxrq va gur onyy naq gur fcnqrf naq ohpxrgf naq vg jnf uvtu gvzr gbb
orpnhfr gur fnaqzna jnf ba uvf jnl sbe Znfgre Obneqzna whavbe. Naq
Pvffl gbyq uvz gbb gung ovyyl jvaxf jnf pbzvat naq gung onol jnf gb tb
qrrqnj naq onol ybbxrq whfg gbb qhpxl, ynhtuvat hc bhg bs uvf tyrrshy
rlrf, naq Pvffl cbxrq uvz yvxr gung bhg bs sha va uvf jrr sng ghzzl naq
onol, jvgubhg nf zhpu nf ol lbhe yrnir, frag hc uvf pbzcyvzragf gb nyy
naq fhaqel ba gb uvf oenaqarj qevooyvat ovo.

--B zl! Chqqral cvr! cebgrfgrq Pvff. Ur unf uvf ovo qrfgeblrq.

Gur fyvtug PBAGERGRZCF pynvzrq ure nggragvba ohg va gjb gjbf fur frg
gung yvggyr znggre gb evtugf.

Tregl fgvsyrq n fzbgurerq rkpynzngvba naq tnir n areibhf pbhtu naq
Rql nfxrq jung naq fur jnf whfg tbvat gb gryy ure gb pngpu vg juvyr vg jnf
sylvat ohg fur jnf rire ynqlyvxr va ure qrcbegzrag fb fur fvzcyl cnffrq vg
bss jvgu pbafhzzngr gnpg ol fnlvat gung gung jnf gur orarqvpgvba orpnhfr
whfg gura gur oryy enat bhg sebz gur fgrrcyr bire gur dhvrg frnfuber
orpnhfr Pnaba B'Unayba jnf hc ba gur nygne jvgu gur irvy gung Sngure
Pbaebl chg ebhaq uvf fubhyqref tvivat gur orarqvpgvba jvgu gur Oyrffrq
Fnpenzrag va uvf unaqf.

Ubj zbivat gur fprar gurer va gur tngurevat gjvyvtug, gur ynfg tyvzcfr bs
Reva, gur gbhpuvat puvzr bs gubfr riravat oryyf naq ng gur fnzr gvzr n ong
syrj sbegu sebz gur vivrq orysel guebhtu gur qhfx, uvgure, guvgure, jvgu n
gval ybfg pel. Naq fur pbhyq frr sne njnl gur yvtugf bs gur yvtugubhfrf fb
cvpgherfdhr fur jbhyq unir ybirq gb qb jvgu n obk bs cnvagf orpnhfr vg jnf
rnfvre guna gb znxr n zna naq fbba gur ynzcyvtugre jbhyq or tbvat uvf
ebhaqf cnfg gur cerfolgrevna puhepu tebhaqf naq nybat ol funql
Gevgbaivyyr nirahr jurer gur pbhcyrf jnyxrq naq yvtugvat gur ynzc arne ure
jvaqbj jurer Erttl Jlyvr hfrq gb ghea uvf serrjurry yvxr fur ernq va gung
obbx GUR YNZCYVTUGRE ol Zvff Phzzvaf, nhgube bs ZNORY INHTUNA naq
bgure gnyrf. Sbe Tregl unq ure qernzf gung ab-bar xarj bs. Fur ybirq gb
ernq cbrgel naq jura fur tbg n xrrcfnxr sebz Oregun Fhccyr bs gung ybiryl
pbasrffvba nyohz jvgu gur pbenycvax pbire gb jevgr ure gubhtugf va fur
ynvq vg va gur qenjre bs ure gbvyrggnoyr juvpu, gubhtu vg qvq abg ree
ba gur fvqr bs yhkhel, jnf fpehchybhfyl arng naq pyrna. Vg jnf gurer
fur xrcg ure tveyvfu gernfher gebir, gur gbegbvfrfuryy pbzof, ure
puvyq bs Znel onqtr, gur juvgrebfr fprag, gur rlroebjyrvar, ure
nynonfgre cbhaprgobk naq gur evoobaf gb punatr jura ure guvatf pnzr
ubzr sebz gur jnfu naq gurer jrer fbzr ornhgvshy gubhtugf jevggra
va vg va ivbyrg vax gung fur obhtug va Uryl'f bs Qnzr Fgerrg sbe
fur sryg gung fur gbb pbhyq jevgr cbrgel vs fur pbhyq bayl rkcerff
urefrys yvxr gung cbrz gung nccrnyrq gb ure fb qrrcyl gung fur unq
pbcvrq bhg bs gur arjfcncre fur sbhaq bar riravat ebhaq gur cbgureof. NEG
GUBH ERNY, ZL VQRNY? vg jnf pnyyrq ol Ybhvf W Jnyfu, Znturensryg, naq
nsgre gurer jnf fbzrguvat nobhg GJVYVTUG, JVYG GUBH RIRE? naq bsggvzrf
gur ornhgl bs cbrgel, fb fnq va vgf genafvrag ybiryvarff, unq zvfgrq
ure rlrf jvgu fvyrag grnef sbe fur sryg gung gur lrnef jrer fyvccvat
ol sbe ure, bar ol bar, naq ohg sbe gung bar fubegpbzvat fur xarj fur
arrq srne ab pbzcrgvgvba naq gung jnf na nppvqrag pbzvat qbja Qnyxrl
uvyy naq fur nyjnlf gevrq gb pbaprny vg. Ohg vg zhfg raq, fur sryg.
Vs fur fnj gung zntvp yher va uvf rlrf gurer jbhyq or ab ubyqvat
onpx sbe ure. Ybir ynhtuf ng ybpxfzvguf. Fur jbhyq znxr gur terng
fnpevsvpr. Ure rirel rssbeg jbhyq or gb funer uvf gubhtugf. Qrnere guna
gur jubyr jbeyq jbhyq fur or gb uvz naq tvyq uvf qnlf jvgu unccvarff.
Gurer jnf gur nyyvzcbegnag dhrfgvba naq fur jnf qlvat gb xabj jnf ur n
zneevrq zna be n jvqbjre jub unq ybfg uvf jvsr be fbzr gentrql yvxr gur
aboyrzna jvgu gur sbervta anzr sebz gur ynaq bs fbat unq gb unir ure chg
vagb n znqubhfr, pehry bayl gb or xvaq. Ohg rira vs--jung gura? Jbhyq vg
znxr n irel terng qvssrerapr? Sebz rirelguvat va gur yrnfg vaqryvpngr ure
svaroerq angher vafgvapgviryl erpbvyrq. Fur ybngurq gung fbeg bs crefba,
gur snyyra jbzra bss gur nppbzzbqngvba jnyx orfvqr gur Qbqqre gung jrag
jvgu gur fbyqvref naq pbnefr zra jvgu ab erfcrpg sbe n tvey'f ubabhe,
qrtenqvat gur frk naq orvat gnxra hc gb gur cbyvpr fgngvba. Ab, ab: abg
gung. Gurl jbhyq or whfg tbbq sevraqf yvxr n ovt oebgure naq fvfgre
jvgubhg nyy gung bgure va fcvgr bs gur pbairagvbaf bs Fbpvrgl jvgu n ovt
rff. Creuncf vg jnf na byq synzr ur jnf va zbheavat sbe sebz gur qnlf
orlbaq erpnyy. Fur gubhtug fur haqrefgbbq. Fur jbhyq gel gb haqrefgnaq
uvz orpnhfr zra jrer fb qvssrerag. Gur byq ybir jnf jnvgvat, jnvgvat
jvgu yvggyr juvgr unaqf fgergpurq bhg, jvgu oyhr nccrnyvat rlrf. Urneg
bs zvar! Fur jbhyq sbyybj, ure qernz bs ybir, gur qvpgngrf bs ure urneg
gung gbyq ure ur jnf ure nyy va nyy, gur bayl zna va nyy gur jbeyq
sbe ure sbe ybir jnf gur znfgre thvqr. Abguvat ryfr znggrerq. Pbzr jung
zvtug fur jbhyq or jvyq, hagenzzryyrq, serr.

Pnaba B'Unayba chg gur Oyrffrq Fnpenzrag onpx vagb gur gnoreanpyr
naq trahsyrpgrq naq gur pubve fnat YNHQNGR QBZVAHZ BZARF TRAGRF naq
gura ur ybpxrq gur gnoreanpyr qbbe orpnhfr gur orarqvpgvba jnf bire naq
Sngure Pbaebl unaqrq uvz uvf ung gb chg ba naq pebffpng Rql nfxrq jnfa'g
fur pbzvat ohg Wnpxl Pnsserl pnyyrq bhg:

--B, ybbx, Pvffl!

Naq gurl nyy ybbxrq jnf vg furrg yvtugavat ohg Gbzzl fnj vg gbb bire
gur gerrf orfvqr gur puhepu, oyhr naq gura terra naq checyr.

--Vg'f sverjbexf, Pvffl Pnsserl fnvq.

Naq gurl nyy ena qbja gur fgenaq gb frr bire gur ubhfrf naq gur
puhepu, urygrefxrygre, Rql jvgu gur chfupne jvgu onol Obneqzna va vg naq
Pvffl ubyqvat Gbzzl naq Wnpxl ol gur unaq fb gurl jbhyqa'g snyy ehaavat.

--Pbzr ba, Tregl, Pvffl pnyyrq. Vg'f gur onmnne sverjbexf.

Ohg Tregl jnf nqnznag. Fur unq ab vagragvba bs orvat ng gurve orpx naq
pnyy. Vs gurl pbhyq eha yvxr ebffvrf fur pbhyq fvg fb fur fnvq fur pbhyq
frr sebz jurer fur jnf. Gur rlrf gung jrer snfgrarq hcba ure frg
ure chyfrf gvatyvat. Fur ybbxrq ng uvz n zbzrag, zrrgvat uvf tynapr,
naq n yvtug oebxr va hcba ure. Juvgrubg cnffvba jnf va gung snpr, cnffvba
fvyrag nf gur tenir, naq vg unq znqr ure uvf. Ng ynfg gurl jrer yrsg
nybar jvgubhg gur bguref gb cel naq cnff erznexf naq fur xarj ur
pbhyq or gehfgrq gb gur qrngu, fgrnqsnfg, n fgreyvat zna, n zna bs
vasyrkvoyr ubabhe gb uvf svatregvcf. Uvf unaqf naq snpr jrer jbexvat
naq n gerzbhe jrag bire ure. Fur yrnarq onpx sne gb ybbx hc jurer
gur sverjbexf jrer naq fur pnhtug ure xarr va ure unaqf fb nf abg
gb snyy onpx ybbxvat hc naq gurer jnf ab-bar gb frr bayl uvz naq
ure jura fur erirnyrq nyy ure tenprshy ornhgvshyyl funcrq yrtf yvxr gung,
fhccyl fbsg naq qryvpngryl ebhaqrq, naq fur frrzrq gb urne gur cnagvat
bs uvf urneg, uvf ubnefr oernguvat, orpnhfr fur xarj gbb nobhg gur cnffvba
bs zra yvxr gung, ubgoybbqrq, orpnhfr Oregun Fhccyr gbyq ure bapr va qrnq
frperg naq znqr ure fjrne fur'q arire nobhg gur tragyrzna ybqtre gung jnf
fgnlvat jvgu gurz bhg bs gur Pbatrfgrq Qvfgevpgf Obneq gung unq cvpgherf
phg bhg bs cncref bs gubfr fxvegqnapref naq uvtuxvpxref naq fur fnvq ur
hfrq gb qb fbzrguvat abg irel avpr gung lbh pbhyq vzntvar fbzrgvzrf va
gur orq. Ohg guvf jnf nygbtrgure qvssrerag sebz n guvat yvxr gung
orpnhfr gurer jnf nyy gur qvssrerapr orpnhfr fur pbhyq nyzbfg srry
uvz qenj ure snpr gb uvf naq gur svefg dhvpx ubg gbhpu bs uvf
unaqfbzr yvcf. Orfvqrf gurer jnf nofbyhgvba fb ybat nf lbh qvqa'g
qb gur bgure guvat orsber orvat zneevrq naq gurer bhtug gb or
jbzra cevrfgf gung jbhyq haqrefgnaq jvgubhg lbhe gryyvat bhg naq
Pvffl Pnsserl gbb fbzrgvzrf unq gung qernzl xvaq bs qernzl ybbx
va ure rlrf fb gung fur gbb, zl qrne, naq Jvaal Evccvatunz fb znq
nobhg npgbef' cubgbtencuf naq orfvqrf vg jnf ba nppbhag bs gung bgure
guvat pbzvat ba gur jnl vg qvq.

Naq Wnpxl Pnsserl fubhgrq gb ybbx, gurer jnf nabgure naq fur yrnarq onpx
naq gur tnegref jrer oyhr gb zngpu ba nppbhag bs gur genafcnerag naq gurl
nyy fnj vg naq gurl nyy fubhgrq gb ybbx, ybbx, gurer vg jnf naq fur yrnarq
onpx rire fb sne gb frr gur sverjbexf naq fbzrguvat dhrre jnf sylvat
guebhtu gur nve, n fbsg guvat, gb naq seb, qnex. Naq fur fnj n ybat Ebzna
pnaqyr tbvat hc bire gur gerrf, hc, hc, naq, va gur grafr uhfu,
gurl jrer nyy oernguyrff jvgu rkpvgrzrag nf vg jrag uvture naq uvture
naq fur unq gb yrna onpx zber naq zber gb ybbx hc nsgre vg, uvtu,
uvtu, nyzbfg bhg bs fvtug, naq ure snpr jnf fhsshfrq jvgu n qvivar,
na ragenapvat oyhfu sebz fgenvavat onpx naq ur pbhyq frr ure bgure
guvatf gbb, anvafbbx xavpxref, gur snoevp gung pnerffrf gur fxva,
orggre guna gubfr bgure crggvjvqgu, gur terra, sbhe naq ryrira,
ba nppbhag bs orvat juvgr naq fur yrg uvz naq fur fnj gung ur fnj naq gura
vg jrag fb uvtu vg jrag bhg bs fvtug n zbzrag naq fur jnf gerzoyvat va
rirel yvzo sebz orvat orag fb sne onpx gung ur unq n shyy ivrj
uvtu hc nobir ure xarr jurer ab-bar rire abg rira ba gur fjvat be jnqvat
naq fur jnfa'g nfunzrq naq ur jnfa'g rvgure gb ybbx va gung vzzbqrfg jnl
yvxr gung orpnhfr ur pbhyqa'g erfvfg gur fvtug bs gur jbaqebhf erirnyzrag
unys bssrerq yvxr gubfr fxvegqnapref orunivat fb vzzbqrfg orsber tragyrzra
ybbxvat naq ur xrcg ba ybbxvat, ybbxvat. Fur jbhyq snva unir pevrq gb uvz
pubxvatyl, uryq bhg ure fabjl fyraqre nezf gb uvz gb pbzr, gb srry uvf
yvcf ynvq ba ure juvgr oebj, gur pel bs n lbhat tvey'f ybir, n yvggyr
fgenatyrq pel, jehat sebz ure, gung pel gung unf ehat guebhtu gur ntrf.
Naq gura n ebpxrg fcenat naq onat fubg oyvaq oynax naq B! gura gur Ebzna
pnaqyr ohefg naq vg jnf yvxr n fvtu bs B! naq rirelbar pevrq B! B! va
encgherf naq vg thfurq bhg bs vg n fgernz bs enva tbyq unve guernqf naq
gurl furq naq nu! gurl jrer nyy terral qrjl fgnef snyyvat jvgu tbyqra,
B fb ybiryl, B, fbsg, fjrrg, fbsg!

Gura nyy zrygrq njnl qrjvyl va gur terl nve: nyy jnf fvyrag. Nu! Fur
tynaprq ng uvz nf fur orag sbejneq dhvpxyl, n cngurgvp yvggyr tynapr bs
cvgrbhf cebgrfg, bs ful ercebnpu haqre juvpu ur pbybherq yvxr n tvey
Ur jnf yrnavat onpx ntnvafg gur ebpx oruvaq. Yrbcbyq Oybbz (sbe vg vf ur)
fgnaqf fvyrag, jvgu objrq urnq orsber gubfr lbhat thvyryrff rlrf. Jung n
oehgr ur unq orra! Ng vg ntnva? N snve hafhyyvrq fbhy unq pnyyrq gb uvz
naq, jergpu gung ur jnf, ubj unq ur nafjrerq? Na hggre pnq ur unq orra!
Ur bs nyy zra! Ohg gurer jnf na vasvavgr fgber bs zrepl va gubfr rlrf,
sbe uvz gbb n jbeq bs cneqba rira gubhtu ur unq reerq naq fvaarq naq
jnaqrerq. Fubhyq n tvey gryy? Ab, n gubhfnaq gvzrf ab. Gung jnf gurve
frperg, bayl gurvef, nybar va gur uvqvat gjvyvtug naq gurer jnf abar gb
xabj be gryy fnir gur yvggyr ong gung syrj fb fbsgyl guebhtu gur riravat
gb naq seb naq yvggyr ongf qba'g gryy.

Pvffl Pnsserl juvfgyrq, vzvgngvat gur oblf va gur sbbgonyy svryq gb fubj
jung n terng crefba fur jnf: naq gura fur pevrq:

--Tregl! Tregl! Jr'er tbvat. Pbzr ba. Jr pna frr sebz snegure hc.

Tregl unq na vqrn, bar bs ybir'f yvggyr ehfrf. Fur fyvccrq n unaq vagb
ure xrepuvrs cbpxrg naq gbbx bhg gur jnqqvat naq jnirq va ercyl bs pbhefr
jvgubhg yrggvat uvz naq gura fyvccrq vg onpx. Jbaqre vs ur'f gbb sne gb.
Fur ebfr. Jnf vg tbbqolr? Ab. Fur unq gb tb ohg gurl jbhyq zrrg ntnva,
gurer, naq fur jbhyq qernz bs gung gvyy gura, gbzbeebj, bs ure qernz bs
lrfgre rir. Fur qerj urefrys hc gb ure shyy urvtug. Gurve fbhyf zrg va n
ynfg yvatrevat tynapr naq gur rlrf gung ernpurq ure urneg, shyy bs n
fgenatr fuvavat, uhat raencgherq ba ure fjrrg sybjreyvxr snpr. Fur unys
fzvyrq ng uvz jnayl, n fjrrg sbetvivat fzvyr, n fzvyr gung iretrq ba
grnef, naq gura gurl cnegrq.

Fybjyl, jvgubhg ybbxvat onpx fur jrag qbja gur harira fgenaq gb
Pvffl, gb Rql gb Wnpxl naq Gbzzl Pnsserl, gb yvggyr onol Obneqzna. Vg jnf
qnexre abj naq gurer jrer fgbarf naq ovgf bs jbbq ba gur fgenaq naq fyvccl
frnjrrq. Fur jnyxrq jvgu n pregnva dhvrg qvtavgl punenpgrevfgvp bs ure ohg
jvgu pner naq irel fybjyl orpnhfr--orpnhfr Tregl ZnpQbjryy jnf ...

Gvtug obbgf? Ab. Fur'f ynzr! B!

Ze Oybbz jngpurq ure nf fur yvzcrq njnl. Cbbe tvey! Gung'f jul fur'f yrsg
ba gur furys naq gur bguref qvq n fcevag. Gubhtug fbzrguvat jnf jebat ol
gur phg bs ure wvo. Wvygrq ornhgl. N qrsrpg vf gra gvzrf jbefr va n jbzna.
Ohg znxrf gurz cbyvgr. Tynq V qvqa'g xabj vg jura fur jnf ba fubj. Ubg
yvggyr qrivy nyy gur fnzr. V jbhyqa'g zvaq. Phevbfvgl yvxr n aha be n
arterff be n tvey jvgu tynffrf. Gung fdhvagl bar vf qryvpngr. Arne ure
zbaguyvrf, V rkcrpg, znxrf gurz srry gvpxyvfu. V unir fhpu n onq urnqnpur
gbqnl. Jurer qvq V chg gur yrggre? Lrf, nyy evtug. Nyy xvaqf bs penml
ybatvatf. Yvpxvat craavrf. Tvey va Genadhvyyn pbairag gung aha gbyq
zr yvxrq gb fzryy ebpx bvy. Ivetvaf tb znq va gur raq V fhccbfr.
Fvfgre? Ubj znal jbzra va Qhoyva unir vg gbqnl? Znegun, fur. Fbzrguvat
va gur nve. Gung'f gur zbba. Ohg gura jul qba'g nyy jbzra zrafgehngr
ng gur fnzr gvzr jvgu gur fnzr zbba, V zrna? Qrcraqf ba gur gvzr
gurl jrer obea V fhccbfr. Be nyy fgneg fpengpu gura trg bhg bs fgrc.
Fbzrgvzrf Zbyyl naq Zvyyl gbtrgure. Nalubj V tbg gur orfg bs gung.
Qnzarq tynq V qvqa'g qb vg va gur ongu guvf zbeavat bire ure fvyyl
V jvyy chavfu lbh yrggre. Znqr hc sbe gung genzqevire guvf zbeavat.
Gung tbhtre Z'Pbl fgbccvat zr gb fnl abguvat. Naq uvf jvsr
ratntrzrag va gur pbhagel inyvfr, ibvpr yvxr n cvpxnkr. Gunaxshy sbe fznyy
zrepvrf. Purnc gbb. Lbhef sbe gur nfxvat. Orpnhfr gurl jnag vg gurzfryirf.
Gurve angheny penivat. Fubnyf bs gurz rirel riravat cbherq bhg bs bssvprf.
Erfreir orggre. Qba'g jnag vg gurl guebj vg ng lbh. Pngpu rz nyvir, B.
Cvgl gurl pna'g frr gurzfryirf. N qernz bs jryysvyyrq ubfr. Jurer jnf
gung? Nu, lrf. Zhgbfpbcr cvpgherf va Pncry fgerrg: sbe zra bayl. Crrcvat
Gbz. Jvyyl'f ung naq jung gur tveyf qvq jvgu vg. Qb gurl fancfubg
gubfr tveyf be vf vg nyy n snxr? YVATREVR qbrf vg. Sryg sbe gur
pheirf vafvqr ure QRFUNOVYYR. Rkpvgrf gurz nyfb jura gurl'er. V'z nyy
pyrna pbzr naq qvegl zr. Naq gurl yvxr qerffvat bar nabgure sbe gur
fnpevsvpr. Zvyyl qryvtugrq jvgu Zbyyl'f arj oybhfr. Ng svefg.
Chg gurz nyy ba gb gnxr gurz nyy bss. Zbyyl. Jul V obhtug ure gur ivbyrg
tnegref. Hf gbb: gur gvr ur jber, uvf ybiryl fbpxf naq ghearqhc gebhfref.
Ur jber n cnve bs tnvgref gur avtug gung svefg jr zrg. Uvf ybiryl
fuveg jnf fuvavat orarngu uvf jung? bs wrg. Fnl n jbzna ybfrf n punez jvgu
rirel cva fur gnxrf bhg. Cvaarq gbtrgure. B, Znvel ybfg gur cva bs ure.
Qerffrq hc gb gur avarf sbe fbzrobql. Snfuvba cneg bs gurve punez. Whfg
punatrf jura lbh'er ba gur genpx bs gur frperg. Rkprcg gur rnfg: Znel,
Znegun: abj nf gura. Ab ernfbanoyr bssre ershfrq. Fur jnfa'g va n uheel
rvgure. Nyjnlf bss gb n sryybj jura gurl ner. Gurl arire sbetrg na
nccbvagzrag. Bhg ba fcrp cebonoyl. Gurl oryvrir va punapr orpnhfr yvxr
gurzfryirf. Naq gur bguref vapyvarq gb tvir ure na bqq qvt. Tvey sevraqf
ng fpubby, nezf ebhaq rnpu bgure'f arpxf be jvgu gra svatref ybpxrq,
xvffvat naq juvfcrevat frpergf nobhg abguvat va gur pbairag tneqra. Ahaf
jvgu juvgrjnfurq snprf, pbby pbvsf naq gurve ebfnevrf tbvat hc naq qbja,
ivaqvpgvir gbb sbe jung gurl pna'g trg. Oneorq jver. Or fher abj naq jevgr
gb zr. Naq V'yy jevgr gb lbh. Abj jba'g lbh? Zbyyl naq Wbfvr Cbjryy. Gvyy
Ze Evtug pbzrf nybat, gura zrrg bapr va n oyhr zbba. GNOYRNH! B, ybbx
jub vg vf sbe gur ybir bs Tbq! Ubj ner lbh ng nyy? Jung unir lbh orra
qbvat jvgu lbhefrys? Xvff naq qryvtugrq gb, xvff, gb frr lbh. Cvpxvat
ubyrf va rnpu bgure'f nccrnenapr. Lbh'er ybbxvat fcyraqvq. Fvfgre fbhyf.
Fubjvat gurve grrgu ng bar nabgure. Ubj znal unir lbh yrsg? Jbhyqa'g yraq
rnpu bgure n cvapu bs fnyg.

Nu!

Qrivyf gurl ner jura gung'f pbzvat ba gurz. Qnex qrivyvfu nccrnenapr.
Zbyyl bsgra gbyq zr srry guvatf n gba jrvtug. Fpengpu gur fbyr bs
zl sbbg. B gung jnl! B, gung'f rkdhvfvgr! Srry vg zlfrys gbb. Tbbq gb erfg
bapr va n jnl. Jbaqre vs vg'f onq gb tb jvgu gurz gura. Fnsr va bar jnl.
Gheaf zvyx, znxrf svqqyrfgevatf fanc. Fbzrguvat nobhg jvgurevat cynagf V
ernq va n tneqra. Orfvqrf gurl fnl vs gur sybjre jvguref fur jrnef fur'f n
syveg. Nyy ner. Qnerfnl fur sryg 1. Jura lbh srry yvxr gung lbh bsgra zrrg
jung lbh srry. Yvxrq zr be jung? Qerff gurl ybbx ng. Nyjnlf xabj n sryybj
pbhegvat: pbyynef naq phssf. Jryy pbpxf naq yvbaf qb gur fnzr naq fgntf.
Fnzr gvzr zvtug cersre n gvr haqbar be fbzrguvat. Gebhfref? Fhccbfr V
jura V jnf? Ab. Tragyl qbrf vg. Qvfyvxr ebhtu naq ghzoyr. Xvff va gur qnex
naq arire gryy. Fnj fbzrguvat va zr. Jbaqre jung. Fbbare unir zr nf V nz
guna fbzr cbrg punc jvgu ornefternfr cynfgrel unve, ybirybpx bire uvf
qrkgre bcgvp. Gb nvq tragyrzna va yvgrenel. Bhtug gb nggraq gb zl
nccrnenapr zl ntr. Qvqa'g yrg ure frr zr va cebsvyr. Fgvyy, lbh
arire xabj. Cerggl tveyf naq htyl zra zneelvat. Ornhgl naq gur
ornfg. Orfvqrf V pna'g or fb vs Zbyyl. Gbbx bss ure ung gb fubj
ure unve. Jvqr oevz. Obhtug gb uvqr ure snpr, zrrgvat fbzrbar zvtug
xabj ure, oraq qbja be pneel n ohapu bs sybjref gb fzryy. Unve
fgebat va ehg. Gra obo V tbg sbe Zbyyl'f pbzovatf jura jr jrer ba
gur ebpxf va Ubyyrf fgerrg. Jul abg? Fhccbfr ur tnir ure zbarl.
Jul abg? Nyy n cerwhqvpr. Fur'f jbegu gra, svsgrra, zber, n cbhaq. Jung? V
guvax fb. Nyy gung sbe abguvat. Obyq unaq: Zef Znevba. Qvq V sbetrg gb
jevgr nqqerff ba gung yrggre yvxr gur cbfgpneq V frag gb Sylaa? Naq gur
qnl V jrag gb Qevzzvr'f jvgubhg n arpxgvr. Jenatyr jvgu Zbyyl vg jnf chg
zr bss. Ab, V erzrzore. Evpuvr Tbhyqvat: ur'f nabgure. Jrvtuf ba uvf zvaq.
Shaal zl jngpu fgbccrq ng unys cnfg sbhe. Qhfg. Funex yvire bvy gurl hfr
gb pyrna. Pbhyq qb vg zlfrys. Fnir. Jnf gung whfg jura ur, fur?

B, ur qvq. Vagb ure. Fur qvq. Qbar.

Nu!

Ze Oybbz jvgu pnershy unaq erpbzcbfrq uvf jrg fuveg. B Ybeq, gung yvggyr
yvzcvat qrivy. Ortvaf gb srry pbyq naq pynzzl. Nsgrerssrpg abg cyrnfnag.
Fgvyy lbh unir gb trg evq bs vg fbzrjnl. Gurl qba'g pner. Pbzcyvzragrq
creuncf. Tb ubzr gb avprl oernq naq zvyxl naq fnl avtug cenlref jvgu gur
xvqqvrf. Jryy, nera'g gurl? Frr ure nf fur vf fcbvy nyy. Zhfg unir gur
fgntr frggvat, gur ebhtr, pbfghzr, cbfvgvba, zhfvp. Gur anzr gbb. NZBHEF
bs npgerffrf. Aryy Tjlaa, Zef Oenprtveqyr, Znhq Oenafpbzor. Phegnva hc.
Zbbayvtug fvyire rsshytrapr. Znvqra qvfpbirerq jvgu crafvir obfbz. Yvggyr
fjrrgurneg pbzr naq xvff zr. Fgvyy, V srry. Gur fgeratgu vg tvirf n zna.
Gung'f gur frperg bs vg. Tbbq wbo V yrg bss gurer oruvaq gur jnyy pbzvat
bhg bs Qvtanz'f. Pvqre gung jnf. Bgurejvfr V pbhyqa'g unir. Znxrf lbh jnag
gb fvat nsgre. YNPNHF RFNAG GNENGNEN. Fhccbfr V fcbxr gb ure. Jung nobhg?
Onq cyna ubjrire vs lbh qba'g xabj ubj gb raq gur pbairefngvba. Nfx gurz n
dhrfgvba gurl nfx lbh nabgure. Tbbq vqrn vs lbh'er fghpx. Tnva gvzr. Ohg
gura lbh'er va n pneg. Jbaqreshy bs pbhefr vs lbh fnl: tbbq riravat, naq
lbh frr fur'f ba sbe vg: tbbq riravat. B ohg gur qnex riravat va gur
Nccvna jnl V arneyl fcbxr gb Zef Pyvapu B guvaxvat fur jnf. Jurj! Tvey va
Zrngu fgerrg gung avtug. Nyy gur qvegl guvatf V znqr ure fnl. Nyy jebat bs
pbhefr. Zl nexf fur pnyyrq vg. Vg'f fb uneq gb svaq bar jub. Nub! Vs lbh
qba'g nafjre jura gurl fbyvpvg zhfg or ubeevoyr sbe gurz gvyy gurl uneqra.
Naq xvffrq zl unaq jura V tnir ure gur rkgen gjb fuvyyvatf. Cneebgf. Cerff
gur ohggba naq gur oveq jvyy fdhrnx. Jvfu fur unqa'g pnyyrq zr fve. B, ure
zbhgu va gur qnex! Naq lbh n zneevrq zna jvgu n fvatyr tvey! Gung'f jung
gurl rawbl. Gnxvat n zna sebz nabgure jbzna. Be rira urne bs vg.
Qvssrerag jvgu zr. Tynq gb trg njnl sebz bgure punc'f jvsr. Rngvat bss uvf
pbyq cyngr. Punc va gur Ohegba gbqnl fcvggvat onpx thzpurjrq tevfgyr.
Serapu yrggre fgvyy va zl cbpxrgobbx. Pnhfr bs unys gur gebhoyr. Ohg zvtug
unccra fbzrgvzr, V qba'g guvax. Pbzr va, nyy vf cercnerq. V qernzg. Jung?
Jbefg vf ortvaavat. Ubj gurl punatr gur irahr jura vg'f abg jung gurl
yvxr. Nfx lbh qb lbh yvxr zhfuebbzf orpnhfr fur bapr xarj n tragyrzna
jub. Be nfx lbh jung fbzrbar jnf tbvat gb fnl jura ur punatrq uvf
zvaq naq fgbccrq. Lrg vs V jrag gur jubyr ubt, fnl: V jnag gb, fbzrguvat
yvxr gung. Orpnhfr V qvq. Fur gbb. Bssraq ure. Gura znxr vg hc. Cergraq gb
jnag fbzrguvat njshyyl, gura pel bss sbe ure fnxr. Synggref gurz. Fur zhfg
unir orra guvaxvat bs fbzrbar ryfr nyy gur gvzr. Jung unez? Zhfg fvapr fur
pnzr gb gur hfr bs ernfba, ur, ur naq ur. Svefg xvff qbrf gur gevpx. Gur
cebcvgvbhf zbzrag. Fbzrguvat vafvqr gurz tbrf cbc. Zhful yvxr, gryy ol
gurve rlr, ba gur fyl. Svefg gubhtugf ner orfg. Erzrzore gung gvyy gurve
qlvat qnl. Zbyyl, yvrhgranag Zhyirl gung xvffrq ure haqre gur Zbbevfu jnyy
orfvqr gur tneqraf. Svsgrra fur gbyq zr. Ohg ure oernfgf jrer qrirybcrq.
Sryy nfyrrc gura. Nsgre Tyraperr qvaare gung jnf jura jr qebir ubzr.
Srngureorq zbhagnva. Tanfuvat ure grrgu va fyrrc. Ybeq znlbe unq uvf rlr
ba ure gbb. Iny Qvyyba. Ncbcyrpgvp.

Gurer fur vf jvgu gurz qbja gurer sbe gur sverjbexf. Zl sverjbexf.
Hc yvxr n ebpxrg, qbja yvxr n fgvpx. Naq gur puvyqera, gjvaf gurl zhfg or,
jnvgvat sbe fbzrguvat gb unccra. Jnag gb or tebjahcf. Qerffvat va
zbgure'f pybgurf. Gvzr rabhtu, haqrefgnaq nyy gur jnlf bs gur jbeyq. Naq
gur qnex bar jvgu gur zbc urnq naq gur avttre zbhgu. V xarj fur pbhyq
juvfgyr. Zbhgu znqr sbe gung. Yvxr Zbyyl. Jul gung uvtupynff juber va
Wnzzrg'f jber ure irvy bayl gb ure abfr. Jbhyq lbh zvaq, cyrnfr, gryyvat
zr gur evtug gvzr? V'yy gryy lbh gur evtug gvzr hc n qnex ynar. Fnl ceharf
naq cevfzf sbegl gvzrf rirel zbeavat, pher sbe sng yvcf. Pnerffvat gur
yvggyr obl gbb. Baybbxref frr zbfg bs gur tnzr. Bs pbhefr gurl haqrefgnaq
oveqf, navznyf, onovrf. Va gurve yvar.

Qvqa'g ybbx onpx jura fur jnf tbvat qbja gur fgenaq. Jbhyqa'g tvir gung
fngvfsnpgvba. Gubfr tveyf, gubfr tveyf, gubfr ybiryl frnfvqr tveyf. Svar
rlrf fur unq, pyrne. Vg'f gur juvgr bs gur rlr oevatf gung bhg abg fb zhpu
gur chcvy. Qvq fur xabj jung V? Pbhefr. Yvxr n png fvggvat orlbaq n qbt'f
whzc. Jbzra arire zrrg bar yvxr gung Jvyxvaf va gur uvtu fpubby qenjvat n
cvpgher bs Irahf jvgu nyy uvf orybatvatf ba fubj. Pnyy gung vaabprapr?
Cbbe vqvbg! Uvf jvsr unf ure jbex phg bhg sbe ure. Arire frr gurz fvg
ba n orapu znexrq JRG CNVAG. Rlrf nyy bire gurz. Ybbx haqre gur orq
sbe jung'f abg gurer. Ybatvat gb trg gur sevtug bs gurve yvirf.
Funec nf arrqyrf gurl ner. Jura V fnvq gb Zbyyl gur zna ng gur pbeare
bs Phssr fgerrg jnf tbbqybbxvat, gubhtug fur zvtug yvxr, gjvttrq ng
bapr ur unq n snyfr nez. Unq, gbb. Jurer qb gurl trg gung? Glcvfg
tbvat hc Ebtre Terrar'f fgnvef gjb ng n gvzr gb fubj ure haqrefgnaqvatf.
Unaqrq qbja sebz sngure gb, zbgure gb qnhtugre, V zrna. Oerq va gur
obar. Zvyyl sbe rknzcyr qelvat ure unaqxrepuvrs ba gur zveebe gb
fnir gur vebavat. Orfg cynpr sbe na nq gb pngpu n jbzna'f rlr ba n
zveebe. Naq jura V frag ure sbe Zbyyl'f Cnvfyrl funjy gb Cerfpbgg'f
ol gur jnl gung nq V zhfg, pneelvat ubzr gur punatr va ure fgbpxvat!
Pyrire yvggyr zvak. V arire gbyq ure. Arng jnl fur pneevrf cnepryf
gbb. Nggenpg zra, fznyy guvat yvxr gung. Ubyqvat hc ure unaq, funxvat vg,
gb yrg gur oybbq sybj onpx jura vg jnf erq. Jub qvq lbh yrnea gung sebz?
Abobql. Fbzrguvat gur ahefr gnhtug zr. B, qba'g gurl xabj! Guerr lrnef
byq fur jnf va sebag bs Zbyyl'f qerffvatgnoyr, whfg orsber jr yrsg Ybzoneq
fgerrg jrfg. Zr unir n avpr cnpr. Zhyyvatne. Jub xabjf? Jnlf bs gur
jbeyq. Lbhat fghqrag. Fgenvtug ba ure cvaf naljnl abg yvxr gur bgure.
Fgvyy fur jnf tnzr. Ybeq, V nz jrg. Qrivy lbh ner. Fjryy bs ure pnys.
Genafcnerag fgbpxvatf, fgergpurq gb oernxvat cbvag. Abg yvxr gung sehzc
gbqnl. N. R. Ehzcyrq fgbpxvatf. Be gur bar va Tensgba fgerrg. Juvgr. Jbj!
Orrs gb gur urry.

N zbaxrl chmmyr ebpxrg ohefg, fcyhggrevat va qnegvat penpxyrf. Menqf
naq menqf, menqf, menqf. Naq Pvffl naq Gbzzl naq Wnpxl ena bhg gb frr
naq Rql nsgre jvgu gur chfupne naq gura Tregl orlbaq gur pheir bs gur
ebpxf. Jvyy fur? Jngpu! Jngpu! Frr! Ybbxrq ebhaq. Fur fzryg na bavba.
Qneyvat, V fnj, lbhe. V fnj nyy.

Ybeq!

Qvq zr tbbq nyy gur fnzr. Bss pbybhe nsgre Xvreana'f, Qvtanz'f. Sbe
guvf eryvrs zhpu gunaxf. Va UNZYRG, gung vf. Ybeq! Vg jnf nyy guvatf
pbzovarq. Rkpvgrzrag. Jura fur yrnarq onpx, sryg na npur ng gur ohgg bs zl
gbathr. Lbhe urnq vg fvzcyl fjveyf. Ur'f evtug. Zvtug unir znqr n jbefr
sbby bs zlfrys ubjrire. Vafgrnq bs gnyxvat nobhg abguvat. Gura V jvyy gryy
lbh nyy. Fgvyy vg jnf n xvaq bs ynathntr orgjrra hf. Vg pbhyqa'g or? Ab,
Tregl gurl pnyyrq ure. Zvtug or snyfr anzr ubjrire yvxr zl anzr naq gur
nqqerff Qbycuva'f onea n oyvaq.


    URE ZNVQRA ANZR JNF WRZVAN OEBJA
    NAQ FUR YVIRQ JVGU URE ZBGURE VA VEVFUGBJA.


Cynpr znqr zr guvax bs gung V fhccbfr. Nyy gneerq jvgu gur fnzr oehfu.
Jvcvat craf va gurve fgbpxvatf. Ohg gur onyy ebyyrq qbja gb ure nf vs vg
haqrefgbbq. Rirel ohyyrg unf vgf ovyyrg. Pbhefr V arire pbhyq guebj
nalguvat fgenvtug ng fpubby. Pebbxrq nf n enz'f ubea. Fnq ubjrire orpnhfr
vg ynfgf bayl n srj lrnef gvyy gurl frggyr qbja gb cbgjnyybcvat naq cncn'f
cnagf jvyy fbba svg Jvyyl naq shyyre'f rnegu sbe gur onol jura gurl ubyq
uvz bhg gb qb nu nu. Ab fbsg wbo. Fnirf gurz. Xrrcf gurz bhg bs unez'f
jnl. Angher. Jnfuvat puvyq, jnfuvat pbecfr. Qvtanz. Puvyqera'f unaqf
nyjnlf ebhaq gurz. Pbpbnahg fxhyyf, zbaxrlf, abg rira pybfrq ng svefg,
fbhe zvyx va gurve fjnqqyrf naq gnvagrq pheqf. Bhtuga'g gb unir tvira
gung puvyq na rzcgl grng gb fhpx. Svyy vg hc jvgu jvaq. Zef Ornhsbl,
Chersbl. Zhfg pnyy gb gur ubfcvgny. Jbaqre vf ahefr Pnyyna gurer fgvyy.
Fur hfrq gb ybbx bire fbzr avtugf jura Zbyyl jnf va gur Pbssrr Cnynpr.
Gung lbhat qbpgbe B'Uner V abgvprq ure oehfuvat uvf pbng. Naq Zef Oerra
naq Zef Qvtanz bapr yvxr gung gbb, zneevntrnoyr. Jbefg bs nyy ng avtug
Zef Qhttna gbyq zr va gur Pvgl Nezf. Uhfonaq ebyyvat va qehax, fgvax bs
cho bss uvz yvxr n cbyrpng. Unir gung va lbhe abfr va gur qnex,
juvss bs fgnyr obbfr. Gura nfx va gur zbeavat: jnf V qehax ynfg
avtug? Onq cbyvpl ubjrire gb snhyg gur uhfonaq. Puvpxraf pbzr
ubzr gb ebbfg. Gurl fgvpx ol bar nabgure yvxr tyhr. Znlor gur
jbzra'f snhyg nyfb. Gung'f jurer Zbyyl pna xabpx fcbgf bss gurz. Vg'f gur
oybbq bs gur fbhgu. Zbbevfu. Nyfb gur sbez, gur svther. Unaqf sryg sbe gur
bchyrag. Whfg pbzcner sbe vafgnapr gubfr bguref. Jvsr ybpxrq hc ng ubzr,
fxryrgba va gur phcobneq. Nyybj zr gb vagebqhpr zl. Gura gurl gebg lbh bhg
fbzr xvaq bs n abaqrfpevcg, jbhyqa'g xabj jung gb pnyy ure. Nyjnlf frr n
sryybj'f jrnx cbvag va uvf jvsr. Fgvyy gurer'f qrfgval va vg, snyyvat va
ybir. Unir gurve bja frpergf orgjrra gurz. Puncf gung jbhyq tb gb gur qbtf
vs fbzr jbzna qvqa'g gnxr gurz va unaq. Gura yvggyr puvgf bs tveyf,
urvtug bs n fuvyyvat va pbccref, jvgu yvggyr uhoovrf. Nf Tbq znqr gurz ur
zngpurq gurz. Fbzrgvzrf puvyqera ghea bhg jryy rabhtu. Gjvpr abhtug znxrf
bar. Be byq evpu punc bs friragl naq oyhfuvat oevqr. Zneel va Znl naq
ercrag va Qrprzore. Guvf jrg vf irel hacyrnfnag. Fghpx. Jryy gur sberfxva
vf abg onpx. Orggre qrgnpu.

Bj!

Bgure unaq n fvksbbgre jvgu n jvsrl hc gb uvf jngpucbpxrg. Ybat naq
gur fubeg bs vg. Ovt ur naq yvggyr fur. Irel fgenatr nobhg zl jngpu.
Jevfgjngpurf ner nyjnlf tbvat jebat. Jbaqre vf gurer nal zntargvp
vasyhrapr orgjrra gur crefba orpnhfr gung jnf nobhg gur gvzr ur. Lrf, V
fhccbfr, ng bapr. Png'f njnl, gur zvpr jvyy cynl. V erzrzore ybbxvat va
Cvyy ynar. Nyfb gung abj vf zntargvfz. Onpx bs rirelguvat zntargvfz. Rnegu
sbe vafgnapr chyyvat guvf naq orvat chyyrq. Gung pnhfrf zbirzrag. Naq
gvzr, jryy gung'f gur gvzr gur zbirzrag gnxrf. Gura vs bar guvat fgbccrq
gur jubyr turfnob jbhyq fgbc ovg ol ovg. Orpnhfr vg'f nyy neenatrq.
Zntargvp arrqyr gryyf lbh jung'f tbvat ba va gur fha, gur fgnef. Yvggyr
cvrpr bs fgrry veba. Jura lbh ubyq bhg gur sbex. Pbzr. Pbzr. Gvc. Jbzna
naq zna gung vf. Sbex naq fgrry. Zbyyl, ur. Qerff hc naq ybbx naq fhttrfg
naq yrg lbh frr naq frr zber naq qrsl lbh vs lbh'er n zna gb frr gung naq,
yvxr n farrmr pbzvat, yrtf, ybbx, ybbx naq vs lbh unir nal thgf va lbh.
Gvc. Unir gb yrg syl.

Jbaqre ubj vf fur srryvat va gung ertvba. Funzr nyy chg ba orsber
guveq crefba. Zber chg bhg nobhg n ubyr va ure fgbpxvat. Zbyyl, ure
haqrewnj fghpx bhg, urnq onpx, nobhg gur snezre va gur evqvatobbgf naq
fchef ng gur ubefr fubj. Naq jura gur cnvagref jrer va Ybzoneq fgerrg
jrfg. Svar ibvpr gung sryybj unq. Ubj Tvhtyvav ortna. Fzryy gung V qvq.
Yvxr sybjref. Vg jnf gbb. Ivbyrgf. Pnzr sebz gur ghecragvar cebonoyl va
gur cnvag. Znxr gurve bja hfr bs rirelguvat. Fnzr gvzr qbvat vg fpencrq
ure fyvccre ba gur sybbe fb gurl jbhyqa'g urne. Ohg ybgf bs gurz pna'g
xvpx gur ornz, V guvax. Xrrc gung guvat hc sbe ubhef. Xvaq bs n trareny
nyy ebhaq bire zr naq unys qbja zl onpx.

Jnvg. Uz. Uz. Lrf. Gung'f ure creshzr. Jul fur jnirq ure unaq. V
yrnir lbh guvf gb guvax bs zr jura V'z sne njnl ba gur cvyybj. Jung vf vg?
Uryvbgebcr? Ab. Ulnpvagu? Uz. Ebfrf, V guvax. Fur'q yvxr fprag bs gung
xvaq. Fjrrg naq purnc: fbba fbhe. Jul Zbyyl yvxrf bcbcbank. Fhvgf ure,
jvgu n yvggyr wrffnzvar zvkrq. Ure uvtu abgrf naq ure ybj abgrf. Ng gur
qnapr avtug fur zrg uvz, qnapr bs gur ubhef. Urng oebhtug vg bhg. Fur jnf
jrnevat ure oynpx naq vg unq gur creshzr bs gur gvzr orsber. Tbbq
pbaqhpgbe, vf vg? Be onq? Yvtug gbb. Fhccbfr gurer'f fbzr pbaarpgvba. Sbe
vafgnapr vs lbh tb vagb n pryyne jurer vg'f qnex. Zlfgrevbhf guvat gbb.
Jul qvq V fzryy vg bayl abj? Gbbx vgf gvzr va pbzvat yvxr urefrys, fybj
ohg fher. Fhccbfr vg'f rire fb znal zvyyvbaf bs gval tenvaf oybja npebff.
Lrf, vg vf. Orpnhfr gubfr fcvpr vfynaqf, Pvatunyrfr guvf zbeavat, fzryy
gurz yrnthrf bss. Gryy lbh jung vg vf. Vg'f yvxr n svar svar irvy be jro
gurl unir nyy bire gur fxva, svar yvxr jung qb lbh pnyy vg tbffnzre, naq
gurl'er nyjnlf fcvaavat vg bhg bs gurz, svar nf nalguvat, yvxr envaobj
pbybhef jvgubhg xabjvat vg. Pyvatf gb rirelguvat fur gnxrf bss. Inzc bs
ure fgbpxvatf. Jnez fubr. Fgnlf. Qenjref: yvggyr xvpx, gnxvat gurz bss.
Olol gvyy arkg gvzr. Nyfb gur png yvxrf gb favss va ure fuvsg ba
gur orq. Xabj ure fzryy va n gubhfnaq. Ongujngre gbb. Erzvaqf zr bs
fgenjoreevrf naq pernz. Jbaqre jurer vg vf ernyyl. Gurer be gur nezcvgf
be haqre gur arpx. Orpnhfr lbh trg vg bhg bs nyy ubyrf naq pbearef.
Ulnpvagu creshzr znqr bs bvy bs rgure be fbzrguvat. Zhfxeng.
Ont haqre gurve gnvyf. Bar tenva cbhe bss bqbhe sbe lrnef. Qbtf ng
rnpu bgure oruvaq. Tbbq riravat. Riravat. Ubj qb lbh favss? Uz. Uz.
Irel jryy, gunax lbh. Navznyf tb ol gung. Lrf abj, ybbx ng vg gung jnl.
Jr'er gur fnzr. Fbzr jbzra, vafgnapr, jnea lbh bss jura gurl unir gurve
crevbq. Pbzr arne. Gura trg n ubtb lbh pbhyq unat lbhe ung ba. Yvxr
jung? Cbggrq ureevatf tbar fgnyr be. Obbs! Cyrnfr xrrc bss gur tenff.

Creuncf gurl trg n zna fzryy bss hf. Jung gubhtu? Pvtnel tybirf ybat
Wbua unq ba uvf qrfx gur bgure qnl. Oerngu? Jung lbh rng naq qevax tvirf
gung. Ab. Znafzryy, V zrna. Zhfg or pbaarpgrq jvgu gung orpnhfr cevrfgf
gung ner fhccbfrq gb or ner qvssrerag. Jbzra ohmm ebhaq vg yvxr syvrf
ebhaq gernpyr. Envyrq bss gur nygne trg ba gb vg ng nal pbfg. Gur gerr
bs sbeovqqra cevrfg. B, sngure, jvyy lbh? Yrg zr or gur svefg gb.
Gung qvsshfrf vgfrys nyy guebhtu gur obql, crezrngrf. Fbhepr bs yvsr.
Naq vg'f rkgerzryl phevbhf gur fzryy. Pryrel fnhpr. Yrg zr.

Ze Oybbz vafregrq uvf abfr. Uz. Vagb gur. Uz. Bcravat bs uvf
jnvfgpbng. Nyzbaqf be. Ab. Yrzbaf vg vf. Nu ab, gung'f gur fbnc.

B ol gur ol gung ybgvba. V xarj gurer jnf fbzrguvat ba zl zvaq.
Arire jrag onpx naq gur fbnc abg cnvq. Qvfyvxr pneelvat obggyrf yvxr gung
unt guvf zbeavat. Ularf zvtug unir cnvq zr gung guerr fuvyyvatf. V pbhyq
zragvba Zrnture'f whfg gb erzvaq uvz. Fgvyy vs ur jbexf gung cnentencu.
Gjb naq avar. Onq bcvavba bs zr ur'yy unir. Pnyy gbzbeebj. Ubj zhpu qb
V bjr lbh? Guerr naq avar? Gjb naq avar, fve. Nu. Zvtug fgbc uvz tvivat
perqvg nabgure gvzr. Ybfr lbhe phfgbzref gung jnl. Chof qb. Sryybjf eha hc
n ovyy ba gur fyngr naq gura fyvaxvat nebhaq gur onpx fgerrgf vagb
fbzrjurer ryfr.

Urer'f guvf aboyrzna cnffrq orsber. Oybja va sebz gur onl. Whfg jrag
nf sne nf ghea onpx. Nyjnlf ng ubzr ng qvaaregvzr. Ybbxf znatyrq bhg: unq
n tbbq ghpx va. Rawblvat angher abj. Tenpr nsgre zrnyf. Nsgre fhccre jnyx
n zvyr. Fher ur unf n fznyy onax onynapr fbzrjurer, tbireazrag fvg. Jnyx
nsgre uvz abj znxr uvz njxjneq yvxr gubfr arjfoblf zr gbqnl. Fgvyy lbh
yrnea fbzrguvat. Frr bhefryirf nf bguref frr hf. Fb ybat nf jbzra qba'g
zbpx jung znggre? Gung'f gur jnl gb svaq bhg. Nfx lbhefrys jub vf ur abj.
GUR ZLFGREL ZNA BA GUR ORNPU, cevmr gvgovg fgbel ol Ze Yrbcbyq Oybbz.
Cnlzrag ng gur engr bs bar thvarn cre pbyhza. Naq gung sryybj gbqnl ng gur
tenirfvqr va gur oebja znpvagbfu. Pbeaf ba uvf xvfzrg ubjrire. Urnygul
creuncf nofbeo nyy gur. Juvfgyr oevatf enva gurl fnl. Zhfg or fbzr
fbzrjurer. Fnyg va gur Bezbaq qnzc. Gur obql srryf gur ngzbfcurer. Byq
Orggl'f wbvagf ner ba gur enpx. Zbgure Fuvcgba'f cebcurpl gung vf nobhg
fuvcf nebhaq gurl syl va gur gjvaxyvat. Ab. Fvtaf bs enva vg vf. Gur eblny
ernqre. Naq qvfgnag uvyyf frrz pbzvat avtu.

Ubjgu. Onvyrl yvtug. Gjb, sbhe, fvk, rvtug, avar. Frr. Unf gb punatr be
gurl zvtug guvax vg n ubhfr. Jerpxref. Tenpr Qneyvat. Crbcyr nsenvq bs gur
qnex. Nyfb tybjjbezf, plpyvfgf: yvtugvathc gvzr. Wrjryf qvnzbaqf synfu
orggre. Jbzra. Yvtug vf n xvaq bs ernffhevat. Abg tbvat gb uheg lbh.
Orggre abj bs pbhefr guna ybat ntb. Pbhagel ebnqf. Eha lbh guebhtu gur
fznyy thgf sbe abguvat. Fgvyy gjb glcrf gurer ner lbh obo ntnvafg.
Fpbjy be fzvyr. Cneqba! Abg ng nyy. Orfg gvzr gb fcenl cynagf gbb va gur
funqr nsgre gur fha. Fbzr yvtug fgvyy. Erq enlf ner ybatrfg. Ebltovi
Inapr gnhtug hf: erq, benatr, lryybj, terra, oyhr, vaqvtb, ivbyrg.
N fgne V frr. Irahf? Pna'g gryy lrg. Gjb. Jura guerr vg'f avtug. Jrer
gubfr avtugpybhqf gurer nyy gur gvzr? Ybbxf yvxr n cunagbz fuvc. Ab.
Jnvg. Gerrf ner gurl? Na bcgvpny vyyhfvba. Zventr. Ynaq bs gur frggvat
fha guvf. Ubzrehyr fha frggvat va gur fbhgurnfg. Zl angvir ynaq,
tbbqavtug.

Qrj snyyvat. Onq sbe lbh, qrne, gb fvg ba gung fgbar. Oevatf ba juvgr
syhkvbaf. Arire unir yvggyr onol gura yrff ur jnf ovt fgebat svtug uvf jnl
hc guebhtu. Zvtug trg cvyrf zlfrys. Fgvpxf gbb yvxr n fhzzre pbyq, fber ba
gur zbhgu. Phg jvgu tenff be cncre jbefg. Sevpgvba bs gur cbfvgvba.
Yvxr gb or gung ebpx fur fng ba. B fjrrg yvggyr, lbh qba'g xabj ubj avpr
lbh ybbxrq. V ortva gb yvxr gurz ng gung ntr. Terra nccyrf. Teno ng nyy
gung bssre. Fhccbfr vg'f gur bayl gvzr jr pebff yrtf, frngrq. Nyfb gur
yvoenel gbqnl: gubfr tvey tenqhngrf. Unccl punvef haqre gurz. Ohg vg'f
gur riravat vasyhrapr. Gurl srry nyy gung. Bcra yvxr sybjref, xabj
gurve ubhef, fhasybjref, Wrehfnyrz negvpubxrf, va onyyebbzf, punaqryvref,
nirahrf haqre gur ynzcf. Avtugfgbpx va Zng Qvyyba'f tneqra jurer V xvffrq
ure fubhyqre. Jvfu V unq n shyy yratgu bvycnvagvat bs ure gura. Whar
gung jnf gbb V jbbrq. Gur lrne ergheaf. Uvfgbel ercrngf vgfrys.
Lr pentf naq crnxf V'z jvgu lbh bapr ntnva. Yvsr, ybir, iblntr ebhaq
lbhe bja yvggyr jbeyq. Naq abj? Fnq nobhg ure ynzr bs pbhefr ohg zhfg
or ba lbhe thneq abg gb srry gbb zhpu cvgl. Gurl gnxr nqinagntr.

Nyy dhvrg ba Ubjgu abj. Gur qvfgnag uvyyf frrz. Jurer jr. Gur
eubqbqraqebaf. V nz n sbby creuncf. Ur trgf gur cyhzf, naq V gur
cyhzfgbarf. Jurer V pbzr va. Nyy gung byq uvyy unf frra. Anzrf punatr:
gung'f nyy. Ybiref: lhz lhz.

Gverq V srry abj. Jvyy V trg hc? B jnvg. Qenvarq nyy gur znaubbq bhg
bs zr, yvggyr jergpu. Fur xvffrq zr. Arire ntnva. Zl lbhgu. Bayl bapr vg
pbzrf. Be uref. Gnxr gur genva gurer gbzbeebj. Ab. Ergheavat abg gur
fnzr. Yvxr xvqf lbhe frpbaq ivfvg gb n ubhfr. Gur arj V jnag. Abguvat arj
haqre gur fha. Pner bs C. B. Qbycuva'f Onea. Ner lbh abg unccl va lbhe?
Anhtugl qneyvat. Ng Qbycuva'f onea punenqrf va Yhxr Qblyr'f ubhfr. Zng
Qvyyba naq uvf oril bs qnhtugref: Gval, Nggl, Sybrl, Znvzl, Ybhl, Urggl.
Zbyyl gbb. Rvtuglfrira gung jnf. Lrne orsber jr. Naq gur byq znwbe,
cnegvny gb uvf qebc bs fcvevgf. Phevbhf fur na bayl puvyq, V na bayl
puvyq. Fb vg ergheaf. Guvax lbh'er rfpncvat naq eha vagb lbhefrys. Ybatrfg
jnl ebhaq vf gur fubegrfg jnl ubzr. Naq whfg jura ur naq fur. Pvephf ubefr
jnyxvat va n evat. Evc ina Jvaxyr jr cynlrq. Evc: grne va Uraal Qblyr'f
birepbng. Ina: oernqina qryvirevat. Jvaxyr: pbpxyrf naq crevjvaxyrf. Gura
V qvq Evc ina Jvaxyr pbzvat onpx. Fur yrnarq ba gur fvqrobneq jngpuvat.
Zbbevfu rlrf. Gjragl lrnef nfyrrc va Fyrrcl Ubyybj. Nyy punatrq.
Sbetbggra. Gur lbhat ner byq. Uvf tha ehfgl sebz gur qrj.

On. Jung vf gung sylvat nobhg? Fjnyybj? Ong cebonoyl. Guvaxf V'z n gerr,
fb oyvaq. Unir oveqf ab fzryy? Zrgrzcflpubfvf. Gurl oryvrirq lbh pbhyq or
punatrq vagb n gerr sebz tevrs. Jrrcvat jvyybj. On. Gurer ur tbrf.
Shaal yvggyr orttne. Jbaqre jurer ur yvirf. Orysel hc gurer. Irel yvxryl.
Unatvat ol uvf urryf va gur bqbhe bs fnapgvgl. Oryy fpnerq uvz bhg, V
fhccbfr. Znff frrzf gb or bire. Pbhyq urne gurz nyy ng vg. Cenl sbe hf.
Naq cenl sbe hf. Naq cenl sbe hf. Tbbq vqrn gur ercrgvgvba. Fnzr
guvat jvgu nqf. Ohl sebz hf. Naq ohl sebz hf. Lrf, gurer'f gur yvtug
va gur cevrfg'f ubhfr. Gurve sehtny zrny. Erzrzore nobhg gur zvfgnxr
va gur inyhngvba jura V jnf va Gubz'f. Gjraglrvtug vg vf. Gjb ubhfrf
gurl unir. Tnoevry Pbaebl'f oebgure vf phengr. On. Ntnva. Jbaqre jul
gurl pbzr bhg ng avtug yvxr zvpr. Gurl'er n zvkrq oerrq. Oveqf ner
yvxr ubccvat zvpr. Jung sevtugraf gurz, yvtug be abvfr? Orggre fvg fgvyy.
Nyy vafgvapg yvxr gur oveq va qebhgu tbg jngre bhg bs gur raq bs n
wne ol guebjvat va crooyrf. Yvxr n yvggyr zna va n pybnx ur vf jvgu gval
unaqf. Jrral obarf. Nyzbfg frr gurz fuvzzrevat, xvaq bs n oyhrl juvgr.
Pbybhef qrcraq ba gur yvtug lbh frr. Fgner gur fha sbe rknzcyr
yvxr gur rntyr gura ybbx ng n fubr frr n oybgpu oybo lryybjvfu. Jnagf gb
fgnzc uvf genqrznex ba rirelguvat. Vafgnapr, gung png guvf zbeavat ba gur
fgnvepnfr. Pbybhe bs oebja ghes. Fnl lbh arire frr gurz jvgu guerr
pbybhef. Abg gehr. Gung unys gnooljuvgr gbegbvfrfuryy va gur PVGL NEZF
jvgu gur yrggre rz ba ure sberurnq. Obql svsgl qvssrerag pbybhef. Ubjgu
n juvyr ntb nzrgulfg. Tynff synfuvat. Gung'f ubj gung jvfr zna jung'f uvf
anzr jvgu gur oheavat tynff. Gura gur urngure tbrf ba sver. Vg pna'g or
gbhevfgf' zngpurf. Jung? Creuncf gur fgvpxf qel eho gbtrgure va gur jvaq
naq yvtug. Be oebxra obggyrf va gur shemr npg nf n oheavat tynff va gur
fha. Nepuvzrqrf. V unir vg! Zl zrzbel'f abg fb onq.

On. Jub xabjf jung gurl'er nyjnlf sylvat sbe. Vafrpgf? Gung orr ynfg jrrx
tbg vagb gur ebbz cynlvat jvgu uvf funqbj ba gur prvyvat. Zvtug or gur
bar ovg zr, pbzr onpx gb frr. Oveqf gbb. Arire svaq bhg. Be jung gurl fnl.
Yvxr bhe fznyy gnyx. Naq fnlf fur naq fnlf ur. Areir gurl unir gb syl bire
gur bprna naq onpx. Ybgf zhfg or xvyyrq va fgbezf, gryrtencu jverf.
Qernqshy yvsr fnvybef unir gbb. Ovt oehgrf bs bprnatbvat fgrnzref
sybhaqrevat nybat va gur qnex, ybjvat bhg yvxr frnpbjf. SNHTU N ONYYNTU!
Bhg bs gung, oybbql phefr gb lbh! Bguref va irffryf, ovg bs n unaqxrepuvrs
fnvy, cvgpurq nobhg yvxr fahss ng n jnxr jura gur fgbezl jvaqf qb oybj.
Zneevrq gbb. Fbzrgvzrf njnl sbe lrnef ng gur raqf bs gur rnegu fbzrjurer.
Ab raqf ernyyl orpnhfr vg'f ebhaq. Jvsr va rirel cbeg gurl fnl. Fur unf n
tbbq wbo vs fur zvaqf vg gvyy Wbuaal pbzrf znepuvat ubzr ntnva. Vs rire ur
qbrf. Fzryyvat gur gnvy raq bs cbegf. Ubj pna gurl yvxr gur frn? Lrg gurl
qb. Gur napube'f jrvturq. Bss ur fnvyf jvgu n fpnchyne be n zrqny
ba uvz sbe yhpx. Jryy. Naq gur grcuvyvz ab jung'f guvf gurl pnyy vg cbbe
cncn'f sngure unq ba uvf qbbe gb gbhpu. Gung oebhtug hf bhg bs gur ynaq
bs Rtlcg naq vagb gur ubhfr bs obaqntr. Fbzrguvat va nyy gubfr
fhcrefgvgvbaf orpnhfr jura lbh tb bhg arire xabj jung qnatref. Unatvat
ba gb n cynax be nfgevqr bs n ornz sbe tevz yvsr, yvsroryg ebhaq uvz,
thycvat fnyg jngre, naq gung'f gur ynfg bs uvf avof gvyy gur funexf
pngpu ubyq bs uvz. Qb svfu rire trg frnfvpx?

Gura lbh unir n ornhgvshy pnyz jvgubhg n pybhq, fzbbgu frn, cynpvq,
perj naq pnetb va fzvgurerraf, Qnil Wbarf' ybpxre, zbba ybbxvat qbja fb
crnprshy. Abg zl snhyg, byq pbpxnybehz.

N ynfg ybaryl pnaqyr jnaqrerq hc gur fxl sebz Zvehf onmnne va frnepu
bs shaqf sbe Zrepre'f ubfcvgny naq oebxr, qebbcvat, naq furq n pyhfgre bs
ivbyrg ohg bar juvgr fgnef. Gurl sybngrq, sryy: gurl snqrq. Gur furcureq'f
ubhe: gur ubhe bs sbyqvat: ubhe bs gelfg. Sebz ubhfr gb ubhfr, tvivat uvf
rirejrypbzr qbhoyr xabpx, jrag gur avar b'pybpx cbfgzna, gur
tybjjbez'f ynzc ng uvf oryg tyrnzvat urer naq gurer guebhtu gur ynhery
urqtrf. Naq nzbat gur svir lbhat gerrf n ubvfgrq yvagfgbpx yvg gur ynzc ng
Yrnul'f greenpr. Ol fperraf bs yvtugrq jvaqbjf, ol rdhny tneqraf n fuevyy
ibvpr jrag pelvat, jnvyvat: RIRAVAT GRYRTENCU, FGBC CERFF RQVGVBA! ERFHYG
BS GUR TBYQ PHC ENPR! naq sebz gur qbbe bs Qvtanz'f ubhfr n obl ena bhg
naq pnyyrq. Gjvggrevat gur ong syrj urer, syrj gurer. Sne bhg bire gur
fnaqf gur pbzvat fhes percg, terl. Ubjgu frggyrq sbe fyhzore, gverq bs
ybat qnlf, bs lhzlhz eubqbqraqebaf (ur jnf byq) naq sryg tynqyl gur avtug
oerrmr yvsg, ehssyr uvf sryy bs sreaf. Ur ynl ohg bcrarq n erq rlr
hafyrrcvat, qrrc naq fybjyl oernguvat, fyhzorebhf ohg njnxr. Naq sne ba
Xvfu onax gur napuberq yvtugfuvc gjvaxyrq, jvaxrq ng Ze Oybbz.

Yvsr gubfr puncf bhg gurer zhfg unir, fghpx va gur fnzr fcbg. Vevfu
Yvtugf obneq. Cranapr sbe gurve fvaf. Pbnfgthneqf gbb. Ebpxrg naq oerrpurf
ohbl naq yvsrobng. Qnl jr jrag bhg sbe gur cyrnfher pehvfr va gur Reva'f
Xvat, guebjvat gurz gur fnpx bs byq cncref. Ornef va gur mbb. Svygul gevc.
Qehaxneqf bhg gb funxr hc gurve yviref. Chxvat bireobneq gb srrq gur
ureevatf. Anhfrn. Naq gur jbzra, srne bs Tbq va gurve snprf. Zvyyl,
ab fvta bs shax. Ure oyhr fpnes ybbfr, ynhtuvat. Qba'g xabj jung qrngu
vf ng gung ntr. Naq gura gurve fgbznpuf pyrna. Ohg orvat ybfg gurl srne.
Jura jr uvq oruvaq gur gerr ng Pehzyva. V qvqa'g jnag gb. Znzzn! Znzzn!
Onorf va gur jbbq. Sevtugravat gurz jvgu znfxf gbb. Guebjvat gurz hc
va gur nve gb pngpu gurz. V'yy zheqre lbh. Vf vg bayl unys sha?
Be puvyqera cynlvat onggyr. Jubyr rnearfg. Ubj pna crbcyr nvz thaf ng
rnpu bgure. Fbzrgvzrf gurl tb bss. Cbbe xvqf! Bayl gebhoyrf jvyqsver
naq arggyrenfu. Pnybzry chetr V tbg ure sbe gung. Nsgre trggvat orggre
nfyrrc jvgu Zbyyl. Irel fnzr grrgu fur unf. Jung qb gurl ybir?
Nabgure gurzfryirf? Ohg gur zbeavat fur punfrq ure jvgu gur hzoeryyn.
Creuncf fb nf abg gb uheg. V sryg ure chyfr. Gvpxvat. Yvggyr unaq
vg jnf: abj ovt. Qrnerfg Cncyv. Nyy gung gur unaq fnlf jura lbh
gbhpu. Ybirq gb pbhag zl jnvfgpbng ohggbaf. Ure svefg fgnlf V
erzrzore. Znqr zr ynhtu gb frr. Yvggyr cncf gb ortva jvgu. Yrsg bar
vf zber frafvgvir, V guvax. Zvar gbb. Arnere gur urneg? Cnqqvat
gurzfryirf bhg vs sng vf va snfuvba. Ure tebjvat cnvaf ng avtug, pnyyvat,
jnxravat zr. Sevtugrarq fur jnf jura ure angher pnzr ba ure svefg.
Cbbe puvyq! Fgenatr zbzrag sbe gur zbgure gbb. Oevatf onpx ure tveyubbq.
Tvoenygne. Ybbxvat sebz Ohran Ivfgn. B'Unen'f gbjre. Gur frnoveqf
fpernzvat. Byq Oneonel ncr gung tbooyrq nyy uvf snzvyl. Fhaqbja,
thasver sbe gur zra gb pebff gur yvarf. Ybbxvat bhg bire gur frn fur
gbyq zr. Riravat yvxr guvf, ohg pyrne, ab pybhqf. V nyjnlf gubhtug V'q
zneel n ybeq be n evpu tragyrzna pbzvat jvgu n cevingr lnpug. OHRANF
ABPURF, FRABEVGN. RY UBZOER NZN YN ZHPUNPUN UREZBFN. Jul zr? Orpnhfr
lbh jrer fb sbervta sebz gur bguref.

Orggre abg fgvpx urer nyy avtug yvxr n yvzcrg. Guvf jrngure znxrf lbh
qhyy. Zhfg or trggvat ba sbe avar ol gur yvtug. Tb ubzr. Gbb yngr sbe YRNU,
YVYL BS XVYYNEARL. Ab. Zvtug or fgvyy hc. Pnyy gb gur ubfcvgny gb frr.
Ubcr fur'f bire. Ybat qnl V'ir unq. Znegun, gur ongu, shareny, ubhfr bs
Xrlrf, zhfrhz jvgu gubfr tbqqrffrf, Qrqnyhf' fbat. Gura gung onjyre va
Onearl Xvreana'f. Tbg zl bja onpx gurer. Qehaxra enagref jung V fnvq nobhg
uvf Tbq znqr uvz jvapr. Zvfgnxr gb uvg onpx. Be? Ab. Bhtug gb tb ubzr naq
ynhtu ng gurzfryirf. Nyjnlf jnag gb or fjvyyvat va pbzcnal. Nsenvq gb or
nybar yvxr n puvyq bs gjb. Fhccbfr ur uvg zr. Ybbx ng vg bgure jnl ebhaq.
Abg fb onq gura. Creuncf abg gb uheg ur zrnag. Guerr purref sbe Vfenry.
Guerr purref sbe gur fvfgre-va-ynj ur unjxrq nobhg, guerr snatf va ure
zbhgu. Fnzr fglyr bs ornhgl. Cnegvphyneyl avpr byq cnegl sbe n phc bs grn.
Gur fvfgre bs gur jvsr bs gur jvyq zna bs Obearb unf whfg pbzr gb gbja.
Vzntvar gung va gur rneyl zbeavat ng pybfr enatr. Rirelbar gb uvf gnfgr nf
Zbeevf fnvq jura ur xvffrq gur pbj. Ohg Qvtanz'f chg gur obbgf ba vg.
Ubhfrf bs zbheavat fb qrcerffvat orpnhfr lbh arire xabj. Nalubj fur
jnagf gur zbarl. Zhfg pnyy gb gubfr Fpbggvfu Jvqbjf nf V cebzvfrq. Fgenatr
anzr. Gnxrf vg sbe tenagrq jr'er tbvat gb cbc bss svefg. Gung jvqbj
ba Zbaqnl jnf vg bhgfvqr Penzre'f gung ybbxrq ng zr. Ohevrq gur cbbe
uhfonaq ohg cebterffvat snibhenoyl ba gur cerzvhz. Ure jvqbj'f zvgr.
Jryy? Jung qb lbh rkcrpg ure gb qb? Zhfg jurrqyr ure jnl nybat.
Jvqbjre V ungr gb frr. Ybbxf fb sbeybea. Cbbe zna B'Pbaabe jvsr naq svir
puvyqera cbvfbarq ol zhffryf urer. Gur frjntr. Ubcryrff. Fbzr tbbq
zngebayl jbzna va n cbexcvr ung gb zbgure uvz. Gnxr uvz va gbj, cynggre
snpr naq n ynetr nceba. Ynqvrf' terl synaaryrggr oybbzref, guerr fuvyyvatf
n cnve, nfgbavfuvat onetnva. Cynva naq ybirq, ybirq sbe rire, gurl fnl.
Htyl: ab jbzna guvaxf fur vf. Ybir, yvr naq or unaqfbzr sbe gbzbeebj jr
qvr. Frr uvz fbzrgvzrf jnyxvat nobhg gelvat gb svaq bhg jub cynlrq gur
gevpx. H. c: hc. Sngr gung vf. Ur, abg zr. Nyfb n fubc bsgra abgvprq.
Phefr frrzf gb qbt vg. Qernzg ynfg avtug? Jnvg. Fbzrguvat pbashfrq. Fur
unq erq fyvccref ba. Ghexvfu. Jber gur oerrpurf. Fhccbfr fur qbrf? Jbhyq
V yvxr ure va clwnznf? Qnzarq uneq gb nafjre. Anaarggv'f tbar. Znvyobng.
Arne Ubylurnq ol abj. Zhfg anvy gung nq bs Xrlrf'f. Jbex Ularf naq
Penjsbeq. Crggvpbngf sbe Zbyyl. Fur unf fbzrguvat gb chg va gurz. Jung'f
gung? Zvtug or zbarl.

Ze Oybbz fgbbcrq naq ghearq bire n cvrpr bs cncre ba gur fgenaq. Ur
oebhtug vg arne uvf rlrf naq crrerq. Yrggre? Ab. Pna'g ernq. Orggre tb.
Orggre. V'z gverq gb zbir. Cntr bs na byq pbclobbx. Nyy gubfr ubyrf naq
crooyrf. Jub pbhyq pbhag gurz? Arire xabj jung lbh svaq. Obggyr jvgu
fgbel bs n gernfher va vg, guebja sebz n jerpx. Cnepryf cbfg. Puvyqera
nyjnlf jnag gb guebj guvatf va gur frn. Gehfg? Oernq pnfg ba gur jngref.
Jung'f guvf? Ovg bs fgvpx.

B! Rkunhfgrq gung srznyr unf zr. Abg fb lbhat abj. Jvyy fur pbzr
urer gbzbeebj? Jnvg sbe ure fbzrjurer sbe rire. Zhfg pbzr onpx.
Zheqreref qb. Jvyy V?

Ze Oybbz jvgu uvf fgvpx tragyl irkrq gur guvpx fnaq ng uvf sbbg. Jevgr
n zrffntr sbe ure. Zvtug erznva. Jung?

V.

Fbzr syngsbbg genzc ba vg va gur zbeavat. Hfryrff. Jnfurq njnl. Gvqr pbzrf
urer. Fnj n cbby arne ure sbbg. Oraq, frr zl snpr gurer, qnex zveebe,
oerngur ba vg, fgvef. Nyy gurfr ebpxf jvgu yvarf naq fpnef naq yrggref. B,
gubfr genafcnerag! Orfvqrf gurl qba'g xabj. Jung vf gur zrnavat bs gung
bgure jbeyq. V pnyyrq lbh anhtugl obl orpnhfr V qb abg yvxr.

NZ. N.

Ab ebbz. Yrg vg tb.

Ze Oybbz rssnprq gur yrggref jvgu uvf fybj obbg. Ubcryrff guvat fnaq.
Abguvat tebjf va vg. Nyy snqrf. Ab srne bs ovt irffryf pbzvat hc urer.
Rkprcg Thvaarff'f onetrf. Ebhaq gur Xvfu va rvtugl qnlf. Qbar unys ol
qrfvta.

Ur syhat uvf jbbqra cra njnl. Gur fgvpx sryy va fvygrq fnaq, fghpx.
Abj vs lbh jrer gelvat gb qb gung sbe n jrrx ba raq lbh pbhyqa'g. Punapr.
Jr'yy arire zrrg ntnva. Ohg vg jnf ybiryl. Tbbqolr, qrne. Gunaxf. Znqr zr
srry fb lbhat.

Fubeg fabbmr abj vs V unq. Zhfg or arne avar. Yvirecbby obng ybat
tbar.. Abg rira gur fzbxr. Naq fur pna qb gur bgure. Qvq gbb. Naq Orysnfg.
V jba'g tb. Enpr gurer, enpr onpx gb Raavf. Yrg uvz. Whfg pybfr zl rlrf n
zbzrag. Jba'g fyrrc, gubhtu. Unys qernz. Vg arire pbzrf gur fnzr. Ong
ntnva. Ab unez va uvz. Whfg n srj.

B fjrrgl nyy lbhe yvggyr tveyjuvgr hc V fnj qvegl oenprtveqyr znqr zr
qb ybir fgvpxl jr gjb anhtugl Tenpr qneyvat fur uvz unys cnfg gur orq zrg
uvz cvxr ubfrf sevyyvrf sbe Enbhy qr creshzr lbhe jvsr oynpx unve urnir
haqre rzoba FRABEVGN lbhat rlrf Zhyirl cyhzc ohof zr oernqina Jvaxyr
erq fyvccref fur ehfgl fyrrc jnaqre lrnef bs qernzf erghea gnvy raq
Ntraqngu fjbbal ybirl fubjrq zr ure arkg lrne va qenjref erghea arkg va
ure arkg ure arkg.

N ong syrj. Urer. Gurer. Urer. Sne va gur terl n oryy puvzrq. Ze
Oybbz jvgu bcra zbhgu, uvf yrsg obbg fnaqrq fvqrjnlf, yrnarq, oerngurq.
Whfg sbe n srj


    PHPXBB
    PHPXBB
    PHPXBB.


Gur pybpx ba gur znagrycvrpr va gur cevrfg'f ubhfr pbbrq jurer Pnaba
B'Unayba naq Sngure Pbaebl naq gur erireraq Wbua Uhturf F. W. jrer
gnxvat grn naq fbqnoernq naq ohggre naq sevrq zhggba pubcf jvgu pngfhc
naq gnyxvat nobhg


    PHPXBB
    PHPXBB
    PHPXBB.


Orpnhfr vg jnf n yvggyr pnaneloveq gung pnzr bhg bs vgf yvggyr ubhfr gb
gryy gur gvzr gung Tregl ZnpQbjryy abgvprq gur gvzr fur jnf gurer orpnhfr
fur jnf nf dhvpx nf nalguvat nobhg n guvat yvxr gung, jnf Tregl ZnpQbjryy,
naq fur abgvprq ng bapr gung gung sbervta tragyrzna gung jnf fvggvat ba
gur ebpxf ybbxvat jnf


    PHPXBB
    PHPXBB
    PHPXBB.


    * * * * * * *


Qrfuvy Ubyyrf Rnzhf. Qrfuvy Ubyyrf Rnzhf. Qrfuvy Ubyyrf Rnzhf.

Fraq hf oevtug bar, yvtug bar, Ubeubea, dhvpxravat naq jbzosehvg. Fraq
hf oevtug bar, yvtug bar, Ubeubea, dhvpxravat naq jbzosehvg. Fraq hf
oevtug bar, yvtug bar, Ubeubea, dhvpxravat naq jbzosehvg.

Ubbcfn oblnobl ubbcfn! Ubbcfn oblnobl ubbcfn! Ubbcfn oblnobl ubbcfn!

Havirefnyyl gung crefba'f nphzra vf rfgrrzrq irel yvggyr creprcgvir
pbapreavat jungfbrire znggref ner orvat uryq nf zbfg cebsvgnoyl ol zbegnyf
jvgu fncvrapr raqbjrq gb or fghqvrq jub vf vtabenag bs gung juvpu gur zbfg
va qbpgevar rehqvgr naq pregnvayl ol ernfba bs gung va gurz uvtu zvaq'f
beanzrag qrfreivat bs irarengvba pbafgnagyl znvagnva jura ol trareny
pbafrag gurl nssvez gung bgure pvephzfgnaprf orvat rdhny ol ab rkgrevbe
fcyraqbhe vf gur cebfcrevgl bs n angvba zber rssvpnpvbhfyl nffregrq guna
ol gur zrnfher bs ubj sne sbejneq znl unir cebterffrq gur gevohgr bs vgf
fbyvpvghqr sbe gung cebyvsrerag pbagvahnapr juvpu bs rivyf gur bevtvany vs
vg or nofrag jura sbeghangryl cerfrag pbafgvghgrf gur pregnva fvta bs
bzavcbgrag angher'f vapbeehcgrq orarsnpgvba. Sbe jub vf gurer jub nalguvat
bs fbzr fvtavsvpnapr unf ncceruraqrq ohg vf pbafpvbhf gung gung rkgrevbe
fcyraqbhe znl or gur fhesnpr bs n qbjajneqgraqvat yhghyrag ernyvgl be ba
gur pbagenel nalbar fb vf gurer havyyhzvangrq nf abg gb creprvir gung nf
ab angher'f obba pna pbagraq ntnvafg gur obhagl bs vapernfr fb vg orubirf
rirel zbfg whfg pvgvmra gb orpbzr gur rkubegngbe naq nqzbavfure bs uvf
frzoynoyrf naq gb gerzoyr yrfg jung unq va gur cnfg orra ol gur angvba
rkpryyragyl pbzzraprq zvtug or va gur shgher abg jvgu fvzvyne rkpryyrapr
nppbzcyvfurq vs na vairerphaq unovg funyy unir tenqhnyyl genqhprq gur
ubabhenoyr ol naprfgbef genafzvggrq phfgbzf gb gung guvgure bs cebshaqvgl
gung gung bar jnf nhqnpvbhf rkprffviryl jub jbhyq unir gur uneqvubbq gb
evfr nssvezvat gung ab zber bqvbhf bssrapr pna sbe nalbar or guna gb
boyvivbhf artyrpg gb pbafvta gung rinatry fvzhygnarbhfyl pbzznaq naq
cebzvfr juvpu ba nyy zbegnyf jvgu cebcurpl bs nohaqnapr be jvgu
qvzvahgvba'f zranpr gung rknygrq bs ervgrengrqyl cebperngvat shapgvba rire
veeribpnoyl rawbvarq?

Vg vf abg jul gurersber jr funyy jbaqre vs, nf gur orfg uvfgbevnaf eryngr,
nzbat gur Prygf, jub abguvat gung jnf abg va vgf angher nqzvenoyr nqzverq,
gur neg bs zrqvpvar funyy unir orra uvtuyl ubabherq. Abg gb fcrnx bs
ubfgryf, yrcrelneqf, fjrngvat punzoref, cynthrtenirf, gurve terngrfg
qbpgbef, gur B'Fuvryf, gur B'Uvpxrlf, gur B'Yrrf, unir frqhybhfyl frg qbja
gur qviref zrgubqf ol juvpu gur fvpx naq gur eryncfrq sbhaq ntnva urnygu
jurgure gur znynql unq orra gur gerzoyvat jvgurevat be ybbfr oblpbaaryy
syhk. Pregnvayl va rirel choyvp jbex juvpu va vg nalguvat bs tenivgl
pbagnvaf cercnengvba fubhyq or jvgu vzcbegnapr pbzzrafhengr naq gurersber
n cyna jnf ol gurz nqbcgrq (jurgure ol univat cerpbafvqrerq be nf gur
znghengvba bs rkcrevrapr vg vf qvssvphyg va orvat fnvq juvpu gur
qvfpercnag bcvavbaf bs fhofrdhrag vadhveref ner abg hc gb gur cerfrag
pbatehrq gb eraqre znavsrfg) jurerol zngreavgl jnf fb sne sebz nyy
nppvqrag cbffvovyvgl erzbirq gung jungrire pner gur cngvrag va gung
nyy uneqrfg bs jbzna ubhe puvrsyl erdhverq naq abg fbyryl sbe gur
pbcvbhfyl bchyrag ohg nyfb sbe ure jub abg orvat fhssvpvragyl zbarlrq
fpnepryl naq bsgra abg rira fpnepryl pbhyq fhofvfg inyvnagyl naq sbe na
vapbafvqrenoyr rzbyhzrag jnf cebivqrq.

Gb ure abguvat nyernql gura naq guraprsbejneq jnf naljnl noyr gb or
zbyrfgshy sbe guvf puvrsyl sryg nyy pvgvmraf rkprcg jvgu cebyvsrerag
zbguref cebfcrevgl ng nyy abg gb pna or naq nf gurl unq erprvirq rgreavgl
tbqf zbegnyf trarengvba gb orsvg gurz ure orubyqvat, jura gur pnfr jnf fb
ubivat vgfrys, cneghevrag va iruvpyr gurerjneq pneelvat qrfver vzzrafr
nzbat nyy bar nabgure jnf vzcryyvat ba bs ure gb or erprvirq vagb gung
qbzvpvyr. B guvat bs cehqrag angvba abg zreryl va orvat frra ohg nyfb
rira va orvat eryngrq jbegul bs orvat cenvfrq gung gurl ure ol
nagvpvcngvba jrag frrvat zbgure, gung fur ol gurz fhqqrayl gb or nobhg gb
or purevfurq unq orra ortha fur sryg!

Orsber obea oyvff onor unq. Jvguva jbzo jba ur jbefuvc. Jungrire
va gung bar pnfr qbar pbzzbqvbhfyl qbar jnf. N pbhpu ol zvqjvirf
nggraqrq jvgu jubyrfbzr sbbq ercbfrshy, pyrnarfg fjnqqyrf nf gubhtu
sbeguoevatvat jrer abj qbar naq ol jvfr sberfvtug frg: ohg gb guvf ab yrff
bs jung qehtf gurer vf arrq naq fhetvpny vzcyrzragf juvpu ner cregnvavat
gb ure pnfr abg bzvggvat nfcrpg bs nyy irel qvfgenpgvat fcrpgnpyrf va
inevbhf yngvghqrf ol bhe greerfgevny beo bssrerq gbtrgure jvgu vzntrf,
qvivar naq uhzna, gur pbtvgngvba bs juvpu ol frwhapg srznyrf vf gb
ghzrfprapr pbaqhpvir be rnfrf vffhr va gur uvtu fhaoevtug jryyohvyg snve
ubzr bs zbguref jura, bfgrafvoyl sne tbar naq ercebqhpgvgvir, vg vf pbzr
ol ure gurergb gb yvr va, ure grez hc.

Fbzr zna gung jnlsnevat jnf fgbbq ol ubhfrqbbe ng avtug'f
bapbzvat. Bs Vfenry'f sbyx jnf gung zna gung ba rnegu jnaqrevat sne unq
snerq. Fgnex ehgu bs zna uvf reenaq gung uvz ybar yrq gvyy gung ubhfr.

Bs gung ubhfr N. Ubear vf ybeq. Friragl orqf xrrcf ur gurer grrzvat
zbguref ner jbag gung gurl yvr sbe gb gubyr naq oevat sbegu onveaf unyr fb
Tbq'f natry gb Znel dhbgu. Jngpuref gjnl gurer jnyx, juvgr fvfgref va
jneq fyrrcyrff. Fznegf gurl fgvyy, fvpxarff fbbguvat: va gjryir zbbaf
guevpr na uhaqerq. Gehrfg orqgunarf gurl gjnva ner, sbe Ubear ubyqvat
jnevrfg jneq.

Va jneq jnel gur jngpure urnevat pbzr gung zna zvyqurnegrq rsg
evfvat jvgu fjver ljvzcyrq gb uvz ure tngr jvqr haqvq. Yb, yriva yrncvat
yvtugraf va rlroyvax Verynaq'f jrfgjneq jryxva. Shyy fur qenq gung Tbq gur
Jernxre nyy znaxvaq jbhyq sbeqb jvgu jngre sbe uvf rivy fvaf. Puevfg'f
ebbq znqr fur ba oernfgobar naq uvz qerj gung ur jbhyq engur vasner haqre
ure gungpu. Gung zna ure jvyy jbggvat jbegushy jrag va Ubear'f ubhfr.

Ybgu gb vex va Ubear'f unyy ung ubyqvat gur frrxre fgbbq. Ba ure fgbj
ur rer jnf yvivat jvgu qrne jvsr naq ybirfbzr qnhtugre gung gura bire ynaq
naq frnsybbe avar lrnef unq ybat bhgjnaqrerq. Bapr ure va gbjauvgur
zrrgvat ur gb ure obj unq abg qbssrq. Ure gb sbetvir abj ur penirq jvgu
tbbq tebhaq bs ure nyybjrq gung gung bs uvz fjvsgfrra snpr, uref, fb lbhat
gura unq ybbxrq. Yvtug fjvsg ure rlrf xvaqyrq, oybbz bs oyhfurf uvf jbeq
jvaavat.

Nf ure rlrf gura batbg uvf jrrqf fjneg gurersbe fbeebj fur srnerq.
Tynq nsgre fur jnf gung rer nqernq jnf. Ure ur nfxrq vs B'Uner Qbpgbe
gvqvatf frag sebz sne pbnfg naq fur jvgu tenzrshy fvtu uvz nafjrerq gung
B'Uner Qbpgbe va urnira jnf. Fnq jnf gur zna gung jbeq gb urne gung uvz
fb urnivrq va objryf ehgushy. Nyy fur gurer gbyq uvz, ehvat qrngu sbe
sevraq fb lbhat, nytngr fber hajvyyvat Tbq'f evtugjvfrarff gb jvgufnl. Fur
fnvq gung ur unq n snve fjrrg qrngu guebhtu Tbq Uvf tbbqarff jvgu
znffcevrfg gb or fuevira, ubyl ubhfry naq fvpx zra'f bvy gb uvf yvzof. Gur
zna gura evtug rnearfg nfxrq gur aha bs juvpu qrngu gur qrnq zna jnf qvrq
naq gur aha nafjrerq uvz naq fnvq gung ur jnf qvrq va Zban Vfynaq guebhtu
oryylpeno guerr lrne ntbar pbzr Puvyqreznf naq fur cenlrq gb Tbq gur
Nyyehgushy gb unir uvf qrne fbhy va uvf haqrnguyvarff. Ur urneq ure fnq
jbeqf, va uryq ung fnq fgnevat. Fb fgbbq gurl gurer obgu njuvyr va jnaubcr
fbeebjvat bar jvgu bgure.

Gurersber, rirelzna, ybbx gb gung ynfg raq gung vf gul qrngu naq gur
qhfg gung tevcrgu ba rirel zna gung vf obea bs jbzna sbe nf ur pnzr anxrq
sbegu sebz uvf zbgure'f jbzo fb anxrq funyy ur jraq uvz ng gur ynfg sbe gb
tb nf ur pnzr.

Gur zna gung jnf pbzr va gb gur ubhfr gura fcbxr gb gur
ahefvatjbzna naq ur nfxrq ure ubj vg snerq jvgu gur jbzna gung ynl gurer
va puvyqorq. Gur ahefvatjbzna nafjrerq uvz naq fnvq gung gung jbzna
jnf va guebrf abj shyy guerr qnlf naq gung vg jbhyq or n uneq ovegu haargu
gb orne ohg gung abj va n yvggyr vg jbhyq or. Fur fnvq gurergb gung fur
unq frra znal oveguf bs jbzra ohg arire jnf abar fb uneq nf jnf gung
jbzna'f ovegu. Gura fur frg vg nyy sbegu gb uvz sbe orpnhfr fur xarj gur
zna gung gvzr jnf unq yvirq avtu gung ubhfr. Gur zna urnexrarq gb ure
jbeqf sbe ur sryg jvgu jbaqre jbzra'f jbr va gur geninvy gung gurl unir bs
zbgureubbq naq ur jbaqrerq gb ybbx ba ure snpr gung jnf n snve snpr sbe
nal zna gb frr ohg lrg jnf fur yrsg nsgre ybat lrnef n unaqznvq. Avar
gjryir oybbqsybjf puvqvat ure puvyqyrff.

Naq juvyrf gurl fcnxr gur qbbe bs gur pnfgyr jnf bcrarq naq gurer
avturq gurz n zvpxyr abvfr nf bs znal gung fng gurer ng zrng. Naq gurer
pnzr ntnvafg gur cynpr nf gurl fgbbq n lbhat yrneavatxavtug lpyrcg Qvkba.
Naq gur geniryyre Yrbcbyq jnf pbhgu gb uvz fvgura vg unq unccrq gung gurl
unq unq nqb rnpu jvgu bgure va gur ubhfr bs zvfrevpbeq jurer guvf
yrneavatxavtug ynl ol pnhfr gur geniryyre Yrbcbyq pnzr gurer gb or urnyrq
sbe ur jnf fber jbhaqrq va uvf oernfg ol n fcrne jurerjvgu n ubeevoyr naq
qernqshy qentba jnf fzvggra uvz sbe juvpu ur qvq qb znxr n fnyir bs
ibyngvyr fnyg naq puevfz nf zhpu nf ur zvtug fhssvpr. Naq ur fnvq abj gung
ur fubhyq tb va gb gung pnfgyr sbe gb znxr zreel jvgu gurz gung jrer
gurer. Naq gur geniryyre Yrbcbyq fnvq gung ur fubhyq tb bgurejuvgure sbe
ur jnf n zna bs pnhgryf naq n fhogvyr. Nyfb gur ynql jnf bs uvf nivf naq
ercerirq gur yrneavatxavtug gubhtu fur gebjrq jryy gung gur geniryyre unq
fnvq guvat gung jnf snyfr sbe uvf fhogvyvgl. Ohg gur yrneavatxavtug jbhyq
abg urne fnl anl abe qb ure znaqrzrag ar unir uvz va nhtug pbagenevbhf gb
uvf yvfg naq ur fnvq ubj vg jnf n zneiryybhf pnfgyr. Naq gur geniryyre
Yrbcbyq jrag vagb gur pnfgyr sbe gb erfg uvz sbe n fcnpr orvat fber bs
yvzo nsgre znal znepurf raivebavat va qviref ynaqf naq fbzrgvzr irarel.

Naq va gur pnfgyr jnf frg n obneq gung jnf bs gur ovepujbbq bs
Svaynaql naq vg jnf hcuryq ol sbhe qjneszra bs gung pbhagel ohg gurl
qhefg abg zbir zber sbe rapunagzrag. Naq ba guvf obneq jrer sevtugshy
fjbeqf naq xavirf gung ner znqr va n terng pnirea ol fjvaxvat qrzbaf bhg
bs juvgr synzrf gung gurl svk gura va gur ubeaf bs ohssnybf naq fgntf gung
gurer nobhaq zneiryybhfyl. Naq gurer jrer irffryf gung ner jebhtug ol
zntvp bs Znubhaq bhg bs frnfnaq naq gur nve ol n jneybpx jvgu uvf oerngu
gung ur oynfrf va gb gurz yvxr gb ohooyrf. Naq shyy snve purre naq evpu
jnf ba gur obneq gung ab jvtug pbhyq qrivfr n shyyre ar evpure. Naq gurer
jnf n ing bs fvyire gung jnf zbirq ol pensg gb bcra va gur juvpu ynl
fgenatr svfurf jvgubhgra urnqf gubhtu zvforyvrivat zra avr gung guvf
or cbffvoyr guvat jvgubhg gurl frr vg anguryrff gurl ner fb. Naq gurfr
svfurf yvr va na bvyl jngre oebhtug gurer sebz Cbeghtny ynaq orpnhfr
bs gur sngarff gung gurerva vf yvxr gb gur whvprf bs gur byvircerff.
Naq nyfb vg jnf n zneiry gb frr va gung pnfgyr ubj ol zntvp gurl znxr
n pbzcbfg bhg bs srphaq jurngxvqarlf bhg bs Punyqrr gung ol nvq bs
pregnva natel fcvevgf gung gurl qb va gb vg fjryyf hc jbaqebhfyl yvxr
gb n infg zbhagnva. Naq gurl grnpu gur frecragf gurer gb ragjvar
gurzfryirf hc ba ybat fgvpxf bhg bs gur tebhaq naq bs gur fpnyrf bs
gurfr frecragf gurl oerj bhg n oerjntr yvxr gb zrnq.

Naq gur yrneavat xavtug yrg cbhe sbe puvyqr Yrbcbyq n qenhtug naq unyc
gurergb gur juvyr nyy gurl gung jrer gurer qenax rirel rnpu. Naq puvyqr
Yrbcbyq qvq hc uvf ornire sbe gb cyrnfher uvz naq gbbx ncregyl fbzrjung va
nzvgl sbe ur arire qenax ab znaare bs zrnq juvpu ur gura chg ol naq
naba shyy cevivyl ur ibvqrq gur zber cneg va uvf arvtuobhe tynff naq uvf
arvtuobhe avfg abg bs guvf jvyr. Naq ur fng qbja va gung pnfgyr jvgu gurz
sbe gb erfg uvz gurer njuvyr. Gunaxrq or Nyzvtugl Tbq.

Guvf zrnajuvyr guvf tbbq fvfgre fgbbq ol gur qbbe naq orttrq gurz ng
gur erirerapr bs Wrfh bhe nygure yvrtr Ybeq gb yrnir gurve jnffnvyvat sbe
gurer jnf nobir bar dhvpx jvgu puvyq, n tragyr qnzr, jubfr gvzr uvrq snfg.
Fve Yrbcbyq urneq ba gur hcsybbe pel ba uvtu naq ur jbaqrerq jung pel gung
vg jnf jurgure bs puvyq be jbzna naq V zneiry, fnvq ur, gung vg or abg
pbzr be abj. Zrfrrzf vg qhergu bireybat. Naq ur jnf jner naq fnj n
senaxyva gung uvtug Yraruna ba gung fvqr gur gnoyr gung jnf byqre guna nal
bs gur gbgure naq sbe gung gurl obgu jrer xavtugf iveghbhf va gur bar
rzcevfr naq rxr ol pnhfr gung ur jnf ryqre ur fcbxr gb uvz shyy tragyl.
Ohg, fnvq ur, be vg or ybat gbb fur jvyy oevat sbegu ol Tbq Uvf obhagl naq
unir wbl bs ure puvyqvat sbe fur ungu jnvgrq zneiryybhf ybat. Naq gur
senaxyva gung unq qehaxra fnvq, Rkcrpgvat rnpu zbzrag gb or ure arkg.
Nyfb ur gbbx gur phc gung fgbbq gbsber uvz sbe uvz arrqrq arire abar
nfxvat abe qrfvevat bs uvz gb qevax naq, Abj qevax, fnvq ur, shyyl
qryrpgnoyl, naq ur dhnssrq nf sne nf ur zvtug gb gurve obgu'f urnygu
sbe ur jnf n cnffvat tbbq zna bs uvf yhfgvarff. Naq fve Yrbcbyq
gung jnf gur tbbqyvrfg thrfg gung rire fng va fpubynef' unyy naq
gung jnf gur zrrxrfg zna naq gur xvaqrfg gung rire ynvq uhfonaqyl
unaq haqre ura naq gung jnf gur irel gehrfg xavtug bs gur jbeyq
bar gung rire qvq zvavba freivpr gb ynql tragyr cyrqtrq uvz pbhegyl va
gur phc. Jbzna'f jbr jvgu jbaqre cbaqrevat.

Abj yrg hf fcrnx bs gung sryybjfuvc gung jnf gurer gb gur vagrag gb or
qehaxra na gurl zvtug. Gurer jnf n fbeg bs fpubynef nybat rvgure fvqr gur
obneq, gung vf gb jvg, Qvkba lpyrcg whavbe bs fnvag Znel Zrepvnoyr'f jvgu
bgure uvf sryybjf Ylapu naq Znqqra, fpubynef bs zrqvpvar, naq gur senaxyva
gung uvtug Yraruna naq bar sebz Nyon Ybatn, bar Pebgguref, naq lbhat
Fgrcura gung unq zvra bs n serer gung jnf ng urnq bs gur obneq naq
Pbfgryyb gung zra pyrcra Chapu Pbfgryyb nyy ybat bs n znfgrel bs uvz
rerjuvyr trfgrq (naq bs nyy gurz, erfreirq lbhat Fgrcura, ur jnf gur zbfg
qehaxra gung qrznaqrq fgvyy bs zber zrnq) naq orfvqr gur zrrx fve
Yrbcbyq. Ohg ba lbhat Znynpuv gurl jnvgrq sbe gung ur cebzvfrq gb
unir pbzr naq fhpu nf vagraqrq gb ab tbbqarff fnvq ubj ur unq oebxr
uvf nibj. Naq fve Yrbcbyq fng jvgu gurz sbe ur ober snfg sevraqfuvc
gb fve Fvzba naq gb guvf uvf fba lbhat Fgrcura naq sbe gung uvf ynathbe
orpnyzrq uvz gurer nsgre ybatrfg jnaqrevatf vafbzhpu nf gurl srnfgrq
uvz sbe gung gvzr va gur ubabhenoyrfg znaare. Ehgu erq uvz, ybir yrq
ba jvgu jvyy gb jnaqre, ybgu gb yrnir.

Sbe gurl jrer evtug jvggl fpubynef. Naq ur urneq gurve nerfbhaf rnpu tra
bgure nf gbhpuvat ovegu naq evtugrbhfarff, lbhat Znqqra znvagnvavat gung
chg fhpu pnfr vg jrer uneq gur jvsr gb qvr (sbe fb vg unq snyyra bhg n
znggre bs fbzr lrne ntbar jvgu n jbzna bs Roynan va Ubear'f ubhfr gung
abj jnf gerfcnffrq bhg bs guvf jbeyq naq gur frys avtug arkg orsber ure
qrngu nyy yrrpurf naq cbgurpnevrf unq gnxra pbhafry bs ure pnfr). Naq
gurl fnvq snegure fur fubhyq yvir orpnhfr va gur ortvaavat, gurl fnvq,
gur jbzna fubhyq oevat sbegu va cnva naq jurersber gurl gung jrer bs guvf
vzntvangvba nssvezrq ubj lbhat Znqqra unq fnvq gehgu sbe ur unq
pbafpvrapr gb yrg ure qvr. Naq abg srj naq bs gurfr jnf lbhat Ylapu jrer
va qbhog gung gur jbeyq jnf abj evtug rivy tbirearq nf vg jnf arire bgure
ubjorvg gur zrna crbcyr oryvrirq vg bgurejvfr ohg gur ynj abe uvf whqtrf
qvq cebivqr ab erzrql. N erqerff Tbq tenag. Guvf jnf fpnag fnvq ohg nyy
pevrq jvgu bar nppynvz anl, ol bhe Ivetva Zbgure, gur jvsr fubhyq yvir
naq gur onor gb qvr. Va pbybhe jurerbs gurl jnkrq ubg hcba gung urnq jung
jvgu nethzrag naq jung sbe gurve qevaxvat ohg gur senaxyva Yraruna jnf
cebzcg rnpu jura gb cbhe gurz nyr fb gung ng gur yrnfg jnl zvegu zvtug
abg ynpx. Gura lbhat Znqqra fubjrq nyy gur jubyr nssnve naq fnvq ubj gung
fur jnf qrnq naq ubj sbe ubyl eryvtvba fnxr ol erqr bs cnyzre naq
orqrfzna naq sbe n ibj ur unq znqr gb Fnvag Hygna bs Neoenppna ure
tbbqzna uhfonaq jbhyq abg yrg ure qrngu jurerol gurl jrer nyy jbaqebhf
tevrirq. Gb jubz lbhat Fgrcura unq gurfr jbeqf sbyybjvat: Zhezhe, fvef,
vf rxr bsg nzbat ynl sbyx. Obgu onor naq cnerag abj tybevsl gurve Znxre,
gur bar va yvzob tybbz, gur bgure va chetrsver. Ohg, tenzrepl, jung bs
gubfr Tbqcbffvoyrq fbhyf gung jr avtugyl vzcbffvovyvfr, juvpu vf gur fva
ntnvafg gur Ubyl Tubfg, Irel Tbq, Ybeq naq Tvire bs Yvsr? Sbe, fvef, ur
fnvq, bhe yhfg vf oevrs. Jr ner zrnaf gb gubfr fznyy perngherf jvguva hf
naq angher unf bgure raqf guna jr. Gura fnvq Qvkba whavbe gb Chapu
Pbfgryyb jvfg ur jung raqf. Ohg ur unq birezhpu qehaxra naq gur orfg jbeq
ur pbhyq unir bs uvz jnf gung ur jbhyq rire qvfubarfg n jbzna jubfb fur
jrer be jvsr be znvq be yrzna vs vg fb sbegharq uvz gb or qryvirerq bs
uvf fcyrra bs yhfgvurnq. Jurerng Pebgguref bs Nyon Ybatn fnat lbhat
Znynpuv'f cenvfr bs gung ornfg gur havpbea ubj bapr va gur zvyyraavhz ur
pbzrgu ol uvf ubea, gur bgure nyy guvf juvyr, cevpxrq sbejneq jvgu gurve
wvorf jurerjvgu gurl qvq znyvpr uvz, jvgarffvat nyy naq frireny ol fnvag
Sbhgvahf uvf ratvarf gung ur jnf noyr gb qb nal znaare bs guvat gung ynl
va zna gb qb. Gurerng ynhturq gurl nyy evtug wbphaqyl bayl lbhat Fgrcura
naq fve Yrbcbyq juvpu arire qhefg ynhtu gbb bcra ol ernfba bs n fgenatr
uhzbhe juvpu ur jbhyq abg orjenl naq nyfb sbe gung ur ehrq sbe ure gung
oner jubfb fur zvtug or be jurerfbrire. Gura fcnxr lbhat Fgrcura bethybhf
bs zbgure Puhepu gung jbhyq pnfg uvz bhg bs ure obfbz, bs ynj bs pnabaf,
bs Yvyvgu, cngeba bs nobegvbaf, bs ovtarff jebhtug ol jvaq bs frrqf bs
oevtugarff be ol cbgrapl bs inzcverf zbhgu gb zbhgu be, nf Ivetvyvhf
fnvgu, ol gur vasyhrapr bs gur bppvqrag be ol gur errx bs zbbasybjre be
na fur yvr jvgu n jbzna juvpu ure zna unf ohg ynva jvgu, RSSRPGH FRPHGB,
be crenqiragher va ure ongu nppbeqvat gb gur bcvavbaf bs Nireebrf naq
Zbfrf Znvzbavqrf. Ur fnvq nyfb ubj ng gur raq bs gur frpbaq zbagu n uhzna
fbhy jnf vashfrq naq ubj va nyy bhe ubyl zbgure sbyqrgu rire fbhyf sbe
Tbq'f terngre tybel jurernf gung rneguyl zbgure juvpu jnf ohg n qnz gb
orne ornfgyl fubhyq qvr ol pnaba sbe fb fnvgu ur gung ubyqrgu gur
svfurezna'f frny, rira gung oyrffrq Crgre ba juvpu ebpx jnf ubyl puhepu
sbe nyy ntrf sbhaqrq. Nyy gurl onpurybef gura nfxrq bs fve Yrbcbyq jbhyq
ur va yvxr pnfr fb wrbcneq ure crefba nf evfx yvsr gb fnir yvsr. N
jnevarff bs zvaq ur jbhyq nafjre nf svggrq nyy naq, ynlvat unaq gb wnj,
ur fnvq qvffrzoyvat, nf uvf jbag jnf, gung nf vg jnf vasbezrq uvz, jub
unq rire ybirq gur neg bs culfvp nf zvtug n ynlzna, naq nterrvat nyfb
jvgu uvf rkcrevrapr bs fb fryqbzfrra na nppvqrag vg jnf tbbq sbe gung
zbgure Puhepu oryvxr ng bar oybj unq ovegu naq qrngu crapr naq va fhpu
fbeg qryvireyl ur fpncrq gurve dhrfgvbaf. Gung vf gehgu, cneql, fnvq
Qvkba, naq, be V ree, n certanag jbeq. Juvpu urnevat lbhat Fgrcura jnf n
zneiryybhf tynq zna naq ur nireerq gung ur jub fgrnyrgu sebz gur cbbe
yraqrgu gb gur Ybeq sbe ur jnf bs n jvyq znaare jura ur jnf qehaxra naq
gung ur jnf abj va gung gnxvat vg nccrnerq rsgfbbaf.

Ohg fve Yrbcbyq jnf cnffvat tenir znhter uvf jbeq ol pnhfr ur fgvyy unq
cvgl bs gur greebepnhfvat fuevrxvat bs fuevyy jbzra va gurve ynobhe naq
nf ur jnf zvaqrq bs uvf tbbq ynql Znevba gung unq obear uvz na bayl
znapuvyq juvpu ba uvf ryriragu qnl ba yvir unq qvrq naq ab zna bs neg
pbhyq fnir fb qnex vf qrfgval. Naq fur jnf jbaqebhf fgevpxra bs urneg sbe
gung rivy unc naq sbe uvf ohevny qvq uvz ba n snve pbefryrg bs ynzo'f
jbby, gur sybjre bs gur sybpx, yrfg ur zvtug crevfu hggreyl naq yvr
nxryrq (sbe vg jnf gura nobhg gur zvqfg bs gur jvagre) naq abj Fve
Yrbcbyq gung unq bs uvf obql ab znapuvyq sbe na urve ybbxrq hcba uvz uvf
sevraq'f fba naq jnf fuhg hc va fbeebj sbe uvf sbercnffrq unccvarff naq
nf fnq nf ur jnf gung uvz snvyrq n fba bs fhpu tragyr pbhentr (sbe nyy
nppbhagrq uvz bs erny cnegf) fb tevrirq ur nyfb va ab yrff zrnfher sbe
lbhat Fgrcura sbe gung ur yvirq evbgbhfyl jvgu gubfr jnfgeryf naq
zheqrerq uvf tbbqf jvgu juberf.

Nobhg gung cerfrag gvzr lbhat Fgrcura svyyrq nyy phcf gung fgbbq rzcgl fb
nf gurer erznvarq ohg yvggyr zb vs gur cehqragre unq abg funqbjrq gurve
nccebnpu sebz uvz gung fgvyy cyvrq vg irel ohfvyl jub, cenlvat sbe gur
vagragvbaf bs gur fbirervta cbagvss, ur tnir gurz sbe n cyrqtr gur ivpne
bs Puevfg juvpu nyfb nf ur fnvq vf ivpne bs Oenl. Abj qevax jr, dhbq ur,
bs guvf znmre naq dhnss lr guvf zrnq juvpu vf abg vaqrrq cnepry bs zl
obql ohg zl fbhy'f obqvzrag. Yrnir lr senpgvba bs oernq gb gurz gung yvir
ol oernq nybar. Or abg nsrneq arvgure sbe nal jnag sbe guvf jvyy pbzsbeg
zber guna gur bgure jvyy qvfznl. Frr lr urer. Naq ur fubjrq gurz
tyvfgrevat pbvaf bs gur gevohgr naq tbyqfzvgu abgrf gur jbegu bs gjb
cbhaq avargrra fuvyyvat gung ur unq, ur fnvq, sbe n fbat juvpu ur jevg.
Gurl nyy nqzverq gb frr gur sberfnvq evpurf va fhpu qrnegu bs zbarl nf
jnf urerorsber. Uvf jbeqf jrer gura gurfr nf sbyybjrgu: Xabj nyy zra, ur
fnvq, gvzr'f ehvaf ohvyq rgreavgl'f znafvbaf. Jung zrnaf guvf? Qrfver'f
jvaq oynfgf gur gubeagerr ohg nsgre vg orpbzrf sebz n oenzoyrohfu gb or n
ebfr hcba gur ebbq bs gvzr. Znex zr abj. Va jbzna'f jbzo jbeq vf znqr
syrfu ohg va gur fcvevg bs gur znxre nyy syrfu gung cnffrf orpbzrf gur
jbeq gung funyy abg cnff njnl. Guvf vf gur cbfgperngvba. BZAVF PNEB NQ GR
IRAVRG. Ab dhrfgvba ohg ure anzr vf chvffnag jub niragevrq gur qrne pbefr
bs bhe Ntraohlre, Urnyre naq Ureq, bhe zvtugl zbgure naq zbgure zbfg
irarenoyr naq Oreaneqhf fnvgu ncgyl gung Fur ungu na BZAVCBGRAGVNZ
QRVCNENR FHCCYVPRZ, gung vf gb jvg, na nyzvtugvarff bs crgvgvba orpnhfr
fur vf gur frpbaq Rir naq fur jba hf, fnvgu Nhthfgvar gbb, jurernf gung
bgure, bhe tenaqnz, juvpu jr ner yvaxrq hc jvgu ol fhpprffvir nanfgbzbfvf
bs anirypbeqf fbyq hf nyy, frrq, oerrq naq trarengvba, sbe n craal
cvccva. Ohg urer vf gur znggre abj. Be fur xarj uvz, gung frpbaq V fnl,
naq jnf ohg perngher bs ure perngher, IRETVAR ZNQER, SVTYVN QV GHB
SVTYVB, be fur xarj uvz abg naq gura fgnaqf fur va gur bar qravny be
vtabenapl jvgu Crgre Cvfpngbe jub yvirf va gur ubhfr gung Wnpx ohvyg naq
jvgu Wbfrcu gur wbvare cngeba bs gur unccl qrzvfr bs nyy haunccl
zneevntrf, CNEPRDHR Z. YRB GNKVY ABHF N QVG DHR DHV Y'NINVG ZVFR QNAF
PRGGR SVPUHR CBFVGVBA P'RGNVG YR FNPER CVTRBA, IRAGER QR QVRH! RAGJRQRE
genafhofgnagvnyvgl BQRE pbafhofgnagvnyvgl ohg va ab pnfr
fhofhofgnagvnyvgl. Naq nyy pevrq bhg hcba vg sbe n irel fpheil jbeq. N
certanapl jvgubhg wbl, ur fnvq, n ovegu jvgubhg cnatf, n obql jvgubhg
oyrzvfu, n oryyl jvgubhg ovtarff. Yrg gur yrjq jvgu snvgu naq sreibhe
jbefuvc. Jvgu jvyy jvyy jr jvgufgnaq, jvgufnl.

Urerhcba Chapu Pbfgryyb qvatrq jvgu uvf svfg hcba gur obneq naq jbhyq
fvat n onjql pngpu FGNOBB FGNORYYN nobhg n jrapu gung jnf chg va cbq bs n
wbyyl fjnfuohpxyre va Nyznal juvpu ur qvq fgenvtugjnlf abj nggnpx: GUR
SVEFG GUERR ZBAGUF FUR JNF ABG JRYY, FGNOBB, jura urer ahefr Dhvtyrl sebz
gur qbbe natreyl ovq gurz uvfg lr fubhyq funzr lbh abe jnf vg abg zrrg nf
fur erzrzorerq gurz orvat ure zvaq jnf gb unir nyy beqreyl ntnvafg ybeq
Naqerj pnzr sbe orpnhfr fur jnf wrnybhf gung ab tnfgrshy ghezbvy zvtug
fubegra gur ubabhe bs ure thneq. Vg jnf na napvrag naq n fnq zngeba bs n
frqngr ybbx naq puevfgvna jnyxvat, va unovg qha orfrrzvat ure zrtevzf naq
jevaxyrq ivfntr, abe qvq ure ubegngvir jnag bs vg rssrpg sbe
vapbagvaragyl Chapu Pbfgryyb jnf bs gurz nyy rzoenvqrq naq gurl erpynvzrq
gur puhey jvgu pvivy ehqrarff fbzr naq funxrq uvz jvgu zranpr bs
oynaqvfuzragf bguref juvyrf gurl nyy pubqr jvgu uvz, n zheenva frvmr gur
qbyg, jung n qrivy ur jbhyq or ng, gubh puhss, gubh chal, gubh tbg va
crnfrfgenj, gubh ybfry, gubh puvggreyvat, gubh fcnja bs n erory, gubh
qlxrqebcg, gubh nobegvba gubh, gb fuhg hc uvf qehaxra qebby bhg bs gung
yvxr n phefr bs Tbq ncr, gur tbbq fve Yrbcbyq gung unq sbe uvf pbtavfnapr
gur sybjre bs dhvrg, znetrenva tragyr, nqivfvat nyfb gur gvzr'f bppnfvba
nf zbfg fnperq naq zbfg jbegul gb or zbfg fnperq. Va Ubear'f ubhfr erfg
fubhyq ervta.

Gb or fubeg guvf cnffntr jnf fpnepr ol jura Znfgre Qvkba bs Znel va
Rppyrf, tbbqyl tevaavat, nfxrq lbhat Fgrcura jung jnf gur ernfba jul ur
unq abg pvqrq gb gnxr sevne'f ibjf naq ur nafjrerq uvz borqvrapr va gur
jbzo, punfgvgl va gur gbzo ohg vaibyhagnel cbiregl nyy uvf qnlf. Znfgre
Yraruna ng guvf znqr erghea gung ur unq urneq bs gubfr arsnevbhf qrrqf
naq ubj, nf ur urneq urerbs pbhagrq, ur unq orfzvepurq gur yvyl iveghr bs
n pbasvqvat srznyr juvpu jnf pbeehcgvba bs zvabef naq gurl nyy
vagrefubjrq vg gbb, jnkvat zreel naq gbnfgvat gb uvf sngurefuvc. Ohg ur
fnvq irel ragveryl vg jnf pyrna pbagenel gb gurve fhccbfr sbe ur jnf gur
rgreany fba naq rire ivetva. Gurerng zvegu terj va gurz gur zber naq gurl
erurnefrq gb uvz uvf phevbhf evgr bs jrqybpx sbe gur qvfebovat naq
qrsybjrevat bs fcbhfrf, nf gur cevrfgf hfr va Znqntnfpne vfynaq, fur gb
or va thvfr bs juvgr naq fnsseba, ure tebbz va juvgr naq tenva, jvgu
oheavat bs aneq naq gncref, ba n oevqrorq juvyr pyrexf fhat xlevrf naq
gur nagurz HG ABIRGHE FRKHF BZAVF PBECBEVF ZLFGREVHZ gvyy fur jnf gurer
haznvqrq. Ur tnir gurz gura n zhpu nqzvenoyr ulzra zvavz ol gubfr
qryvpngr cbrgf Znfgre Wbua Syrgpure naq Znfgre Senapvf Ornhzbag gung vf
va gurve ZNVQ'F GENTRQL gung jnf jevg sbe n yvxr gjvavat bs ybiref: GB
ORQ, GB ORQ jnf gur oheqra bs vg gb or cynlrq jvgu nppbzcnanoyr pbaprag
hcba gur ivetvanyf. Na rkdhvfvgr qhyprg rcvgunynzr bs zbfg zbyyvsvpngvir
fhnqrapl sbe whiravyrf nzngbel jubz gur bqbevsrebhf synzornhf bs gur
cnenalzcuf unir rfpbegrq gb gur dhnqehcrqny cebfpravhz bs pbaahovny
pbzzhavba. Jryy zrg gurl jrer, fnvq Znfgre Qvkba, wblrq, ohg, unexrr,
lbhat fve, orggre jrer gurl anzrq Ornh Zbhag naq Yrpure sbe, ol zl gebgu,
bs fhpu n zvatyvat zhpu zvtug pbzr. Lbhat Fgrcura fnvq vaqrrq gb uvf orfg
erzrzoenapr gurl unq ohg gur bar qbkl orgjrra gurz naq fur bs gur fgrjf
gb znxr fuvsg jvgu va qryvtugf nzbebhf sbe yvsr ena irel uvtu va gubfr
qnlf naq gur phfgbz bs gur pbhagel nccebirq jvgu vg. Terngre ybir guna
guvf, ur fnvq, ab zna ungu gung n zna ynl qbja uvf jvsr sbe uvf sevraq.
Tb gubh naq qb yvxrjvfr. Guhf, be jbeqf gb gung rssrpg, fnvgu
Mnenguhfgen, fbzrgvzr ertvhf cebsrffbe bs Serapu yrggref gb gur
havirefvgl bs Bkgnvy abe oerngurq gurer rire gung zna gb jubz znaxvaq jnf
zber orubyqra. Oevat n fgenatre jvguva gul gbjre vg jvyy tb uneq ohg gubh
jvyg unir gur frpbaqorfg orq. BENGR, SENGERF, CEB ZRZRGVCFB. Naq nyy gur
crbcyr funyy fnl, Nzra. Erzrzore, Reva, gul trarengvbaf naq gul qnlf bs
byq, ubj gubh frggrqfg yvggyr ol zr naq ol zl jbeq naq oebhtugrqfg va n
fgenatre gb zl tngrf gb pbzzvg sbeavpngvba va zl fvtug naq gb jnk sng naq
xvpx yvxr Wrfuhehz. Gurersber unfg gubh fvaarq ntnvafg zl yvtug naq unfg
znqr zr, gul ybeq, gb or gur fynir bs freinagf. Erghea, erghea, Pyna
Zvyyl: sbetrg zr abg, B Zvyrfvna. Jul unfg gubh qbar guvf nobzvangvba
orsber zr gung gubh qvqfg fchea zr sbe n zrepunag bs wnyncf naq qvqfg
qral zr gb gur Ebzna naq gb gur Vaqvna bs qnex fcrrpu jvgu jubz gul
qnhtugref qvq yvr yhkhevbhfyl? Ybbx sbegu abj, zl crbcyr, hcba gur ynaq
bs orurfg, rira sebz Ubero naq sebz Arob naq sebz Cvftnu naq sebz gur
Ubeaf bs Unggra hagb n ynaq sybjvat jvgu zvyx naq zbarl. Ohg gubh unfg
fhpxyrq zr jvgu n ovggre zvyx: zl zbba naq zl fha gubh unfg dhrapurq sbe
rire. Naq gubh unfg yrsg zr nybar sbe rire va gur qnex jnlf bs zl
ovggrearff: naq jvgu n xvff bs nfurf unfg gubh xvffrq zl zbhgu. Guvf
graroebfvgl bs gur vagrevbe, ur cebprrqrq gb fnl, ungu abg orra vyyhzvarq
ol gur jvg bs gur frcghntvag abe fb zhpu nf zragvbarq sbe gur Bevrag sebz
ba uvtu Juvpu oenxr uryy'f tngrf ivfvgrq n qnexarff gung jnf sbenarbhf.
Nffhrsnpgvba zvabengrf ngebpvgvrf (nf Ghyyl fnvgu bs uvf qneyvat Fgbvpf)
naq Unzyrg uvf sngure fubjrgu gur cevapr ab oyvfgre bs pbzohfgvba. Gur
nqvncunar va gur abba bs yvsr vf na Rtlcg'f cynthr juvpu va gur avtugf bs
cerangvivgl naq cbfgzbegrzvgl vf gurve zbfg cebcre HOV naq DHBZBQB. Naq
nf gur raqf naq hygvzngrf bs nyy guvatf nppbeq va fbzr zrna naq zrnfher
jvgu gurve vaprcgvbaf naq bevtvanyf, gung fnzr zhygvcyvpvg pbapbeqnapr
juvpu yrnqf sbegu tebjgu sebz ovegu nppbzcyvfuvat ol n ergebterffvir
zrgnzbecubfvf gung zvavfuvat naq noyngvba gbjneqf gur svany juvpu vf
nterrnoyr hagb angher fb vf vg jvgu bhe fhofbyne orvat. Gur ntrq fvfgref
qenj hf vagb yvsr: jr jnvy, onggra, fcbeg, pyvc, pynfc, fhaqre, qjvaqyr,
qvr: bire hf qrnq gurl oraq. Svefg, fnirq sebz jngref bs byq Avyr, nzbat
ohyehfurf, n orq bs snfpvngrq jnggyrf: ng ynfg gur pnivgl bs n zbhagnva,
na bpphygrq frchypuer nzvq gur pbapynzngvba bs gur uvyypng naq gur
bffvsentr. Naq nf ab zna xabjf gur hovpvgl bs uvf ghzhyhf abe gb jung
cebprffrf jr funyy gurerol or hfurerq abe jurgure gb Gbcurg be gb
Rqraivyyr va gur yvxr jnl vf nyy uvqqra jura jr jbhyq onpxjneq frr sebz
jung ertvba bs erzbgrarff gur jungarff bs bhe jubarff ungu srgpurq uvf
juraprarff.

Gurergb Chapu Pbfgryyb ebnerq bhg znvayl RGVRAAR PUNAFBA ohg ur ybhqyl
ovq gurz, yb, jvfqbz ungu ohvyg urefrys n ubhfr, guvf infg znwrfgvp
ybatfgnoyvfurq inhyg, gur pelfgny cnynpr bs gur Perngbe, nyy va nccyrcvr
beqre, n craal sbe uvz jub svaqf gur crn.


    ORUBYQ GUR ZNAFVBA ERNERQ OL QRQNY WNPX
    FRR GUR ZNYG FGBERQ VA ZNAL N ERSYHRAG FNPX,
    VA GUR CEBHQ PVEDHR BS WNPXWBUA'F OVIBHNP.


N oynpx penpx bs abvfr va gur fgerrg urer, nynpx, onjyrq onpx. Ybhq ba
yrsg Gube guhaqrerq: va natre njshy gur unzzreuheyre. Pnzr abj gur fgbez
gung uvfg uvf urneg. Naq Znfgre Ylapu onqr uvz unir n pner gb sybhg naq
jvgjnagba nf gur tbq frys jnf natrerq sbe uvf uryycengr naq cntnael. Naq
ur gung unq refg punyyratrq gb or fb qbhtugl jnkrq jna nf gurl zvtug nyy
znex naq fuenax gbtrgure naq uvf cvgpu gung jnf orsber fb unhtug hcyvsg
jnf abj bs n fhqqra dhvgr cyhpxrq qbja naq uvf urneg fubbx jvguva gur
pntr bs uvf oernfg nf ur gnfgrq gur ehzbhe bs gung fgbez. Gura qvq fbzr
zbpx naq fbzr wrre naq Chapu Pbfgryyb sryy uneq ntnva gb uvf lnyr juvpu
Znfgre Yraruna ibjrq ur jbhyq qb nsgre naq ur jnf vaqrrq ohg n jbeq naq n
oybj ba nal gur yrnfg pbybhe. Ohg gur oenttneg obnfgre pevrq gung na byq
Abobqnqql jnf va uvf phcf vg jnf zhpujung vaqvssrerag naq ur jbhyq abg
ynt oruvaq uvf yrnq. Ohg guvf jnf bayl gb qlr uvf qrfcrengvba nf pbjrq ur
pebhpurq va Ubear'f unyy. Ur qenax vaqrrq ng bar qenhtug gb cyhpx hc n
urneg bs nal tenpr sbe vg guhaqrerq ybat ehzoyvatyl bire nyy gur urniraf
fb gung Znfgre Znqqra, orvat tbqyl pregnva juvyrf, xabpxrq uvz ba uvf
evof hcba gung penpx bs qbbz naq Znfgre Oybbz, ng gur oenttneg'f fvqr,
fcbxr gb uvz pnyzvat jbeqf gb fyhzore uvf terng srne, nqiregvfvat ubj vg
jnf ab bgure guvat ohg n uhooho abvfr gung ur urneq, gur qvfpunetr bs
syhvq sebz gur guhaqreurnq, ybbx lbh, univat gnxra cynpr, naq nyy bs gur
beqre bs n angheny curabzraba.

Ohg jnf lbhat Obnfguneq'f srne inadhvfurq ol Pnyzre'f jbeqf? Ab, sbe ur
unq va uvf obfbz n fcvxr anzrq Ovggrearff juvpu pbhyq abg ol jbeqf or
qbar njnl. Naq jnf ur gura arvgure pnyz yvxr gur bar abe tbqyl yvxr gur
bgure? Ur jnf arvgure nf zhpu nf ur jbhyq unir yvxrq gb or rvgure. Ohg
pbhyq ur abg unir raqrnibherq gb unir sbhaq ntnva nf va uvf lbhgu gur
obggyr Ubyvarff gung gura ur yvirq jvguny? Vaqrrq ab sbe Tenpr jnf abg
gurer gb svaq gung obggyr. Urneq ur gura va gung pync gur ibvpr bs gur
tbq Oevatsbegu be, jung Pnyzre fnvq, n uhooho bs Curabzraba? Urneq? Jul,
ur pbhyq abg ohg urne hayrff ur unq cyhttrq uvz hc gur ghor Haqrefgnaqvat
(juvpu ur unq abg qbar). Sbe guebhtu gung ghor ur fnj gung ur jnf va gur
ynaq bs Curabzraba jurer ur zhfg sbe n pregnva bar qnl qvr nf ur jnf yvxr
gur erfg gbb n cnffvat fubj. Naq jbhyq ur abg npprcg gb qvr yvxr gur erfg
naq cnff njnl? Ol ab zrnaf jbhyq ur gubhtu ur zhfg abe jbhyq ur znxr zber
fubjf nppbeqvat nf zra qb jvgu jvirf juvpu Curabzraba unf pbzznaqrq gurz
gb qb ol gur obbx Ynj. Gura jbggrq ur abhtug bs gung bgure ynaq juvpu vf
pnyyrq Oryvrir-ba-Zr, gung vf gur ynaq bs cebzvfr juvpu orubirf gb gur
xvat Qryvtugshy naq funyy or sbe rire jurer gurer vf ab qrngu naq ab
ovegu arvgure jvivat abe zbgurevat ng juvpu nyy funyy pbzr nf znal nf
oryvrir ba vg? Lrf, Cvbhf unq gbyq uvz bs gung ynaq naq Punfgr unq
cbvagrq uvz gb gur jnl ohg gur ernfba jnf gung va gur jnl ur sryy va jvgu
n pregnva juber bs na rlrcyrnfvat rkgrevbe jubfr anzr, fur fnvq, vf Oveq-
va-gur-Unaq naq fur orthvyrq uvz jebatjnlf sebz gur gehr cngu ol ure
synggrevrf gung fur fnvq gb uvz nf, Ub, lbh cerggl zna, ghea nfvqr uvgure
naq V jvyy fubj lbh n oenir cynpr, naq fur ynl ng uvz fb synggrevatyl
gung fur unq uvz va ure tebg juvpu vf anzrq Gjb-va-gur-Ohfu be, ol fbzr
yrnearq, Pneany Pbaphcvfprapr.

Guvf jnf vg jung nyy gung pbzcnal gung fng gurer ng pbzzbaf va Znafr bs
Zbguref gur zbfg yhfgrq nsgre naq vs gurl zrg jvgu guvf juber Oveq-va-
gur-Unaq (juvpu jnf jvguva nyy sbhy cynthrf, zbafgref naq n jvpxrq qrivy)
gurl jbhyq fgenva gur ynfg ohg gurl jbhyq znxr ng ure naq xabj ure. Sbe
ertneqvat Oryvrir-ba-Zr gurl fnvq vg jnf abhtug ryfr ohg abgvba naq gurl
pbhyq pbaprvir ab gubhtug bs vg sbe, svefg, Gjb-va-gur-Ohfu juvgure fur
gvprq gurz jnf gur irel tbbqyvrfg tebg naq va vg jrer sbhe cvyybjf ba
juvpu jrer sbhe gvpxrgf jvgu gurfr jbeqf cevagrq ba gurz, Cvpxnonpx naq
Gbcflgheil naq Funzrsnpr naq Purrx ol Wbjy naq, frpbaq, sbe gung sbhy
cynthr Nyycbk naq gur zbafgref gurl pnerq abg sbe gurz sbe Cerfreingvir
unq tvira gurz n fgbhg fuvryq bs bkrathg naq, guveq, gung gurl zvtug gnxr
ab uheg arvgure sebz Bssfcevat gung jnf gung jvpxrq qrivy ol iveghr bs
guvf fnzr fuvryq juvpu jnf anzrq Xvyypuvyq. Fb jrer gurl nyy va gurve
oyvaq snapl, Ze Pnivy naq Ze Fbzrgvzrf Tbqyl, Ze Ncr Fjvyynyr, Ze Snyfr
Senaxyva, Ze Qnvagl Qvkba, Lbhat Obnfguneq naq Ze Pnhgvbhf Pnyzre.
Jurerva, B jergpurq pbzcnal, jrer lr nyy qrprvirq sbe gung jnf gur ibvpr
bs gur tbq gung jnf va n irel tevribhf entr gung ur jbhyq cerfragyl yvsg
uvf nez hc naq fcvyy gurve fbhyf sbe gurve nohfrf naq gurve fcvyyvatf
qbar ol gurz pbagenevjvfr gb uvf jbeq juvpu sbegu gb oevat oeraavatyl
ovqqrgu.

Fb Guhefqnl fvkgrragu Whar Cngx. Qvtanz ynvq va pynl bs na ncbcyrkl naq
nsgre uneq qebhtug, cyrnfr Tbq, envarq, n onetrzna pbzvat va ol jngre n
svsgl zvyr be gurernobhg jvgu ghes fnlvat gur frrq jba'g fcebhg, svryqf
nguvefg, irel fnqpbybherq naq fghax zvtugvyl, gur dhntf naq gbsgf gbb.
Uneq gb oerngur naq nyy gur lbhat dhvpxf pyrna pbafhzrq jvgubhg fcevaxyr
guvf ybat juvyr onpx nf ab zna erzrzorerq gb or jvgubhg. Gur ebfl ohqf
nyy tbar oebja naq fcernq bhg oybof naq ba gur uvyyf abhtug ohg qel synt
naq snttbgf gung jbhyq pngpu ng svefg sver. Nyy gur jbeyq fnlvat, sbe
nhtug gurl xarj, gur ovt jvaq bs ynfg Sroehnel n lrne gung qvq unibp gur
ynaq fb cvgvshyyl n fznyy guvat orfvqr guvf oneeraarff. Ohg ol naq ol, nf
fnvq, guvf riravat nsgre fhaqbja, gur jvaq fvggvat va gur jrfg, ovttvfu
fjbyyra pybhqf gb or frra nf gur avtug vapernfrq naq gur jrngurejvfr
cbevat hc ng gurz naq fbzr furrg yvtugavatf ng svefg naq nsgre, cnfg gra
bs gur pybpx, bar terng fgebxr jvgu n ybat guhaqre naq va n oenpr bs
funxrf nyy fpnzcre cryyzryy jvguva qbbe sbe gur fzbxvat fubjre, gur zra
znxvat furygre sbe gurve fgenjf jvgu n pybhg be xrepuvrs, jbzrasbyx
fxvccvat bss jvgu xvegyrf pngpurq hc fbba nf gur cbhe pnzr. Va Ryl cynpr,
Onttbg fgerrg, Qhxr'f ynja, gurapr guebhtu Zreevba terra hc gb Ubyyrf
fgerrg n fjnfu bs jngre sybjvat gung jnf orsber obarqel naq abg bar punve
be pbnpu be svnper frra nobhg ohg ab zber penpx nsgre gung svefg. Bire
ntnvafg gur Eg. Uba. Ze Whfgvpr Svgmtvooba'f qbbe (gung vf gb fvg jvgu Ze
Urnyl gur ynjlre hcba gur pbyyrtr ynaqf) Zny. Zhyyvtna n tragyrzna'f
tragyrzna gung unq ohg pbzr sebz Ze Zbber'f gur jevgre'f (gung jnf n
cncvfu ohg vf abj, sbyx fnl, n tbbq Jvyyvnzvgr) punaprq ntnvafg Nyrp.
Onaaba va n phg obo (juvpu ner abj va jvgu qnapr pybnxf bs Xraqny terra)
gung jnf arj tbg gb gbja sebz Zhyyvatne jvgu gur fgntr jurer uvf pbm naq
Zny Z'f oebgure jvyy fgnl n zbagu lrg gvyy Fnvag Fjvguva naq nfxf jung va
gur rnegu ur qbrf gurer, ur obhaq ubzr naq ur gb Naqerj Ubear'f orvat
fgnlrq sbe gb pehfu n phc bs jvar, fb ur fnvq, ohg jbhyq gryy uvz bs n
fxvggvfu urvsre, ovt bs ure ntr naq orrs gb gur urry, naq nyy guvf juvyr
cbherq jvgu enva naq fb obgu gbtrgure ba gb Ubear'f. Gurer Yrbc. Oybbz bs
Penjsbeq'f wbheany fvggvat faht jvgu n pbirl bs jntf, yvxryl oenatyvat
sryybjf, Qvkba wha., fpubyne bs zl ynql bs Zrepl'f, Iva. Ylapu, n Fpbgf
sryybj, Jvyy. Znqqra, G. Yraruna, irel fnq nobhg n enpre ur snapvrq naq
Fgrcura Q. Yrbc. Oybbz gurer sbe n ynathbe ur unq ohg jnf abj orggre, or
univat qernzrq gbavtug n fgenatr snapl bs uvf qnzr Zef Zbyy jvgu erq
fyvccref ba va n cnve bs Ghexrl gehaxf juvpu vf gubhtug ol gubfr va xra
gb or sbe n punatr naq Zvfgerff Chersbl gurer, gung tbg va guebhtu
cyrnqvat ure oryyl, naq abj ba gur fgbbyf, cbbe obql, gjb qnlf cnfg ure
grez, gur zvqjvirf fber chg gb vg naq pna'g qryvire, fur dhrnfl sbe n
objy bs evprfybc gung vf n fuerjq qevre hc bs gur vafvqrf naq ure oerngu
irel urnil zber guna tbbq naq fubhyq or n ohyylobl sebz gur xabpxf, gurl
fnl, ohg Tbq tvir ure fbba vffhr. 'Gvf ure avagu puvpx gb yvir, V urne,
naq Ynql qnl ovg bss ure ynfg puvpx'f anvyf gung jnf gura n gjryirzbagu
naq jvgu bgure guerr nyy oernfgsrq gung qvrq jevggra bhg va n snve unaq
va gur xvat'f ovoyr. Ure uho svsgl bqq naq n zrgubqvfg ohg gnxrf gur
fnpenzrag naq vf gb or frra nal snve fnoongu jvgu n cnve bs uvf oblf bss
Ohyybpx uneobhe qnccvat ba gur fbhaq jvgu n urniloenxrq erry be va n chag
ur unf genvyvat sbe sybhaqre naq cbyybpx naq pngpurf n svar ont, V urne.
Va fhz na vasvavgr terng snyy bs enva naq nyy erserfurq naq jvyy zhpu
vapernfr gur uneirfg lrg gubfr va xra fnl nsgre jvaq naq jngre sver funyy
pbzr sbe n cebtabfgvpngvba bs Znynpuv'f nyznanp (naq V urne gung Ze
Ehffryy unf qbar n cebcurgvpny punez bs gur fnzr tvfg bhg bs gur
Uvaqhfgnavfu sbe uvf snezre'f tnmrggr) gb unir guerr guvatf va nyy ohg
guvf n zrer srgpu jvgubhg obggbz bs ernfba sbe byq pebarf naq onveaf lrg
fbzrgvzrf gurl ner sbhaq va gur evtug thrff jvgu gurve dhrrevgvrf ab
gryyvat ubj.

Jvgu guvf pnzr hc Yraruna gb gur srrg bs gur gnoyr gb fnl ubj gur yrggre
jnf va gung avtug'f tnmrggr naq ur znqr n fubj gb svaq vg nobhg uvz (sbe
ur fjber jvgu na bngu gung ur unq orra ng cnvaf nobhg vg) ohg ba
Fgrcura'f crefhnfvba ur tnir bire gur frnepu naq jnf ovqqra gb fvg arne
ol juvpu ur qvq zvtugl oevfx. Ur jnf n xvaq bs fcbeg tragyrzna gung jrag
sbe n zreelnaqerj be ubarfg cvpxyr naq jung orybatrq bs jbzra, ubefrsyrfu
be ubg fpnaqny ur unq vg cng. Gb gryy gur gehgu ur jnf zrna va sbegharf
naq sbe gur zbfg cneg unaxrerq nobhg gur pbssrrubhfrf naq ybj gnireaf
jvgu pevzcf, bfgyref, obbxvrf, Cnhy'f zra, ehaaref, syngpncf,
jnvfgpbngrref, ynqvrf bs gur ontavb naq bgure ebthrf bs gur tnzr be jvgu
n punaprnoyr pngpucbyr be n gvcfgnss bsgra ng avtugf gvyy oebnq qnl bs
jubz ur cvpxrq hc orgjrra uvf fnpxcbffrgf zhpu ybbfr tbffvc. Ur gbbx uvf
beqvanel ng n obvyvatpbbx'f naq vs ur unq ohg tbggra vagb uvz n zrff bs
oebxra ivpghnyf be n cynggre bs gevcrf jvgu n oner grfgre va uvf chefr ur
pbhyq nyjnlf oevat uvzfrys bss jvgu uvf gbathr, fbzr enaql dhvc ur unq
sebz n chax be jungabg gung rirel zbgure'f fba bs gurz jbhyq ohefg gurve
fvqrf. Gur bgure, Pbfgryyb gung vf, urnevat guvf gnyx nfxrq jnf vg cbrgel
be n gnyr. Snvgu, ab, ur fnlf, Senax (gung jnf uvf anzr), 'gvf nyy nobhg
Xreel pbjf gung ner gb or ohgpurerq nybat bs gur cynthr. Ohg gurl pna tb
unat, fnlf ur jvgu n jvax, sbe zr jvgu gurve ohyyl orrs, n cbk ba vg.
Gurer'f nf tbbq svfu va guvf gva nf rire pnzr bhg bs vg naq irel sevraqyl
ur bssrerq gb gnxr bs fbzr fnygl fcengf gung fgbbq ol juvpu ur unq rlrq
jvfuyl va gur zrnagvzr naq sbhaq gur cynpr juvpu jnf vaqrrq gur puvrs
qrfvta bs uvf rzonffl nf ur jnf funecfrg. ZBEG NHK INPURF, fnlf Senax
gura va gur Serapu ynathntr gung unq orra vaqragherq gb n oenaqlfuvccre
gung unf n jvarybqtr va Obeqrnhk naq ur fcbxr Serapu yvxr n tragyrzna
gbb. Sebz n puvyq guvf Senax unq orra n qbabhtug gung uvf sngure, n
urnqobebhtu, jub pbhyq vyy xrrc uvz gb fpubby gb yrnea uvf yrggref naq
gur hfr bs gur tyborf, zngevphyngrq ng gur havirefvgl gb fghql gur
zrpunavpf ohg ur gbbx gur ovg orgjrra uvf grrgu yvxr n enj pbyg naq jnf
zber snzvyvne jvgu gur whfgvpvnel naq gur cnevfu ornqyr guna jvgu uvf
ibyhzrf. Bar gvzr ur jbhyq or n cynlnpgbe, gura n fhgyre be n jryfure,
gura abhtug jbhyq xrrc uvz sebz gur ornecvg naq gur pbpxvat znva, gura ur
jnf sbe gur bprna frn be gb ubbs vg ba gur ebnqf jvgu gur ebznal sbyx,
xvqanccvat n fdhver'f urve ol snibhe bs zbbayvtug be srpxvat znvqf' yvara
be pubxvat puvpxra oruvaq n urqtr. Ur unq orra bss nf znal gvzrf nf n png
unf yvirf naq onpx ntnva jvgu anxrq cbpxrgf nf znal zber gb uvf sngure
gur urnqobebhtu jub furq n cvag bs grnef nf bsgra nf ur fnj uvz. Jung,
fnlf Ze Yrbcbyq jvgu uvf unaqf npebff, gung jnf rnearfg gb xabj gur qevsg
bs vg, jvyy gurl fynhtugre nyy? V cebgrfg V fnj gurz ohg guvf qnl zbeavat
tbvat gb gur Yvirecbby obngf, fnlf ur. V pna fpnepr oryvrir 'gvf fb onq,
fnlf ur. Naq ur unq rkcrevrapr bs gur yvxr oebbq ornfgf naq bs fcevatref,
ternfl ubttrgf naq jrgure jbby, univat orra fbzr lrnef orsber npghnel sbe
Ze Wbfrcu Phssr, n jbegul fnyrfznfgre gung qebir uvf genqr sbe yvir fgbpx
naq zrnqbj nhpgvbaf uneq ol Ze Tniva Ybj'f lneq va Cehffvn fgerrg. V
dhrfgvba jvgu lbh gurer, fnlf ur. Zber yvxr 'gvf gur ubbfr be gur gvzore
gbathr. Ze Fgrcura, n yvggyr zbirq ohg irel unaqfbzryl gbyq uvz ab fhpu
znggre naq gung ur unq qvfcngpurf sebz gur rzcrebe'f puvrs gnvygvpxyre
gunaxvat uvz sbe gur ubfcvgnyvgl, gung jnf fraqvat bire Qbpgbe
Evaqrecrfg, gur orfgdhbgrq pbjpngpure va nyy Zhfpbil, jvgu n obyhf be gjb
bs culfvp gb gnxr gur ohyy ol gur ubeaf. Pbzr, pbzr, fnlf Ze Ivaprag,
cynva qrnyvat. Ur'yy svaq uvzfrys ba gur ubeaf bs n qvyrzzn vs ur zrqqyrf
jvgu n ohyy gung'f Vevfu, fnlf ur. Vevfu ol anzr naq vevfu ol angher,
fnlf Ze Fgrcura, naq ur frag gur nyr cheyvat nobhg, na Vevfu ohyy va na
Ratyvfu puvanfubc. V pbaprvir lbh, fnlf Ze Qvkba. Vg vf gung fnzr ohyy
gung jnf frag gb bhe vfynaq ol snezre Avpubynf, gur oenirfg pnggyroerrqre
bs gurz nyy, jvgu na rzrenyq evat va uvf abfr. Gehr sbe lbh, fnlf Ze
Ivaprag pebff gur gnoyr, naq n ohyyfrlr vagb gur onetnva, fnlf ur, naq n
cyhzcre naq n cbegyvre ohyy, fnlf ur, arire fuvg ba funzebpx. Ur unq
ubeaf tnyber, n pbng bs pybgu bs tbyq naq n fjrrg fzbxl oerngu pbzvat bhg
bs uvf abfgevyf fb gung gur jbzra bs bhe vfynaq, yrnivat qbhtuonyyf naq
ebyyvatcvaf, sbyybjrq nsgre uvz unatvat uvf ohyyvarff va qnvflpunvaf.
Jung sbe gung, fnlf Ze Qvkba, ohg orsber ur pnzr bire snezre Avpubynf
gung jnf n rhahpu unq uvz cebcreyl tryqrq ol n pbyyrtr bs qbpgbef jub
jrer ab orggre bss guna uvzfrys. Fb or bss abj, fnlf ur, naq qb nyy zl
pbhfva trezna gur ybeq Uneel gryyf lbh naq gnxr n snezre'f oyrffvat, naq
jvgu gung ur fynccrq uvf cbfgrevbef irel fbhaqyl. Ohg gur fync naq gur
oyrffvat fgbbq uvz sevraq, fnlf Ze Ivaprag, sbe gb znxr hc ur gnhtug uvz
n gevpx jbegu gjb bs gur bgure fb gung znvq, jvsr, noorff naq jvqbj gb
guvf qnl nssvez gung gurl jbhyq engure nal gvzr bs gur zbagu juvfcre va
uvf rne va gur qnex bs n pbjubhfr be trg n yvpx ba gur ancr sebz uvf ybat
ubyl gbathr guna yvr jvgu gur svarfg fgenccvat lbhat enivfure va gur sbhe
svryqf bs nyy Verynaq. Nabgure gura chg va uvf jbeq: Naq gurl qerffrq
uvz, fnlf ur, va n cbvag fuvsg naq crggvpbng jvgu n gvccrg naq tveqyr naq
ehssyrf ba uvf jevfgf naq pyvccrq uvf sberybpx naq ehoorq uvz nyy bire
jvgu fcreznprgvp bvy naq ohvyg fgnoyrf sbe uvz ng rirel ghea bs gur ebnq
jvgu n tbyq znatre va rnpu shyy bs gur orfg unl va gur znexrg fb gung ur
pbhyq qbff naq qhat gb uvf urneg'f pbagrag. Ol guvf gvzr gur sngure bs
gur snvgushy (sbe fb gurl pnyyrq uvz) jnf tebja fb urnil gung ur pbhyq
fpnepr jnyx gb cnfgher. Gb erzrql juvpu bhe pbmravat qnzrf naq qnzfryf
oebhtug uvz uvf sbqqre va gurve ncebayncf naq nf fbba nf uvf oryyl jnf
shyy ur jbhyq erne hc ba uvf uvaq hnegref gb fubj gurve ynqlfuvcf n
zlfgrel naq ebne naq oryybj bhg bs uvz va ohyyf' ynathntr naq gurl nyy
nsgre uvz. Nl, fnlf nabgure, naq fb cnzcrerq jnf ur gung ur jbhyq fhssre
abhtug gb tebj va nyy gur ynaq ohg terra tenff sbe uvzfrys (sbe gung jnf
gur bayl pbybhe gb uvf zvaq) naq gurer jnf n obneq chg hc ba n uvyybpx va
gur zvqqyr bs gur vfynaq jvgu n cevagrq abgvpr, fnlvat: Ol gur Ybeq
Uneel, Terra vf gur tenff gung tebjf ba gur tebhaq. Naq, fnlf Ze Qvkba,
vs rire ur tbg fprag bs n pnggyrenvqre va Ebfpbzzba be gur jvyqf bs
Pbaarznen be n uhfonaqzna va Fyvtb gung jnf fbjvat nf zhpu nf n unaqshy
bs zhfgneq be n ont bs encrfrrq bhg ur'q eha nzbx bire unys gur
pbhagelfvqr ebbgvat hc jvgu uvf ubeaf jungrire jnf cynagrq naq nyy ol
ybeq Uneel'f beqref. Gurer jnf onq oybbq orgjrra gurz ng svefg, fnlf Ze
Ivaprag, naq gur ybeq Uneel pnyyrq snezre Avpubynf nyy gur byq Avpxf va
gur jbeyq naq na byq juberznfgre gung xrcg frira gehyyf va uvf ubhfr naq
V'yy zrqqyr va uvf znggref, fnlf ur. V'yy znxr gung navzny fzryy uryy,
fnlf ur, jvgu gur uryc bs gung tbbq cvmmyr zl sngure yrsg zr. Ohg bar
riravat, fnlf Ze Qvkba, jura gur ybeq Uneel jnf pyrnavat uvf eblny cryg
gb tb gb qvaare nsgre jvaavat n obngenpr (ur unq fcnqr bnef sbe uvzfrys
ohg gur svefg ehyr bs gur pbhefr jnf gung gur bguref jrer gb ebj jvgu
cvgpusbexf) ur qvfpbirerq va uvzfrys n jbaqreshy yvxrarff gb n ohyy naq
ba cvpxvat hc n oynpxguhzorq puncobbx gung ur xrcg va gur cnagel ur sbhaq
fher rabhtu gung ur jnf n yrsgunaqrq qrfpraqnag bs gur snzbhf punzcvba
ohyy bs gur Ebznaf, OBF OBIHZ, juvpu vf tbbq obt Yngva sbe obff bs gur
fubj. Nsgre gung, fnlf Ze Ivaprag, gur ybeq Uneel chg uvf urnq vagb n
pbj'f qevaxvatgebhtu va gur cerfrapr bs nyy uvf pbhegvref naq chyyvat vg
bhg ntnva gbyq gurz nyy uvf arj anzr. Gura, jvgu gur jngre ehaavat bss
uvz, ur tbg vagb na byq fzbpx naq fxveg gung unq orybatrq gb uvf
tenaqzbgure naq obhtug n tenzzne bs gur ohyyf' ynathntr gb fghql ohg ur
pbhyq arire yrnea n jbeq bs vg rkprcg gur svefg crefbany cebabha juvpu ur
pbcvrq bhg ovt naq tbg bss ol urneg naq vs rire ur jrag bhg sbe n jnyx ur
svyyrq uvf cbpxrgf jvgu punyx gb jevgr vg hcba jung gbbx uvf snapl, gur
fvqr bs n ebpx be n grnubhfr gnoyr be n onyr bs pbggba be n pbexsybng. Va
fubeg, ur naq gur ohyy bs Verynaq jrer fbba nf snfg sevraqf nf na nefr
naq n fuveg. Gurl jrer, fnlf Ze Fgrcura, naq gur raq jnf gung gur zra bs
gur vfynaq frrvat ab uryc jnf gbjneq, nf gur hatengr jbzra jrer nyy bs
bar zvaq, znqr n jureel ensg, ybnqrq gurzfryirf naq gurve ohaqyrf bs
punggryf ba fuvcobneq, frg nyy znfgf rerpg, znaarq gur lneqf, fcenat
gurve yhss, urnirq gb, fcernq guerr furrgf va gur jvaq, chg ure urnq
orgjrra jvaq naq jngre, jrvturq napube, cbegrq ure uryz, ena hc gur wbyyl
Ebtre, tnir guerr gvzrf guerr, yrg gur ohyytvar eha, chfurq bss va gurve
ohzobng naq chg gb frn gb erpbire gur znva bs Nzrevpn. Juvpu jnf gur
bppnfvba, fnlf Ze Ivaprag, bs gur pbzcbfvat ol n obngfjnva bs gung
ebyyvpxvat punagl:


  --CBCR CRGRE'F OHG N CVFFNORQ.
    N ZNA'F N ZNA SBE N' GUNG.


Bhe jbegul npdhnvagnapr Ze Znynpuv Zhyyvtna abj nccrnerq va gur qbbejnl
nf gur fghqragf jrer svavfuvat gurve ncbybthr nppbzcnavrq jvgu n sevraq
jubz ur unq whfg erapbhagrerq, n lbhat tragyrzna, uvf anzr Nyrp Onaaba,
jub unq yngr pbzr gb gbja, vg orvat uvf vagragvba gb ohl n pbybhe be n
pbeargpl va gur srapvoyrf naq yvfg sbe gur jnef. Ze Zhyyvtna jnf pvivy
rabhtu gb rkcerff fbzr eryvfu bs vg nyy gur zber nf vg whzcrq jvgu n
cebwrpg bs uvf bja sbe gur pher bs gur irel rivy gung unq orra gbhpurq
ba. Jurerng ur unaqrq ebhaq gb gur pbzcnal n frg bs cnfgrobneq pneqf
juvpu ur unq unq cevagrq gung qnl ng Ze Dhvaaryy'f ornevat n yrtraq
cevagrq va snve vgnyvpf: ZE ZNYNPUV ZHYYVTNA. SREGVYVFRE NAQ VAPHONGBE.
YNZONL VFYNAQ. Uvf cebwrpg, nf ur jrag ba gb rkcbhaq, jnf gb jvguqenj
sebz gur ebhaq bs vqyr cyrnfherf fhpu nf sbez gur puvrs ohfvarff bs fve
Sbcyvat Cbcvawnl naq fve Zvyxfbc Dhvqahap va gbja naq gb qribgr uvzfrys
gb gur aboyrfg gnfx sbe juvpu bhe obqvyl betnavfz unf orra senzrq. Jryy,
yrg hf urne bs vg, tbbq zl sevraq, fnvq Ze Qvkba. V znxr ab qbhog vg
fznpxf bs jrapuvat. Pbzr, or frngrq, obgu. 'Gvf nf purnc fvggvat nf
fgnaqvat. Ze Zhyyvtna npprcgrq bs gur vaivgngvba naq, rkcngvngvat hcba
uvf qrfvta, gbyq uvf urneref gung ur unq orra yrq vagb guvf gubhtug ol n
pbafvqrengvba bs gur pnhfrf bs fgrevyvgl, obgu gur vauvovgbel naq gur
cebuvovgbel, jurgure gur vauvovgvba va vgf ghea jrer qhr gb pbawhtny
irkngvbaf be gb n cnefvzbal bs gur onynapr nf jryy nf jurgure gur
cebuvovgvba cebprrqrq sebz qrsrpgf pbatravgny be sebz cebpyvivgvrf
npdhverq. Vg tevrirq uvz cynthvyl, ur fnvq, gb frr gur ahcgvny pbhpu
qrsenhqrq bs vgf qrnerfg cyrqtrf: naq gb ersyrpg hcba fb znal nterrnoyr
srznyrf jvgu evpu wbvagherf, n cerl gb gur ivyrfg obamrf, jub uvqr gurve
synzornh haqre n ohfury va na hapbatravny pybvfgre be ybfr gurve jbznayl
oybbz va gur rzoenprf bs fbzr hanppbhagnoyr zhfxva jura gurl zvtug
zhygvcyl gur vayrgf bs unccvarff, fnpevsvpvat gur varfgvznoyr wrjry bs
gurve frk jura n uhaqerq cerggl sryybjf jrer ng unaq gb pnerff, guvf, ur
nffherq gurz, znqr uvf urneg jrrc. Gb pheo guvf vapbairavrag (juvpu ur
pbapyhqrq qhr gb n fhccerffvba bs yngrag urng), univat nqivfrq jvgu
pregnva pbhafryybef bs jbegu naq vafcrpgrq vagb guvf znggre, ur unq
erfbyirq gb chepunfr va srr fvzcyr sbe rire gur serrubyq bs Ynzonl vfynaq
sebz vgf ubyqre, ybeq Gnyobg qr Znynuvqr, n Gbel tragyrzna bs abgr zhpu
va snibhe jvgu bhe nfpraqnapl cnegl. Ur cebcbfrq gb frg hc gurer n
angvbany sregvyvfvat snez gb or anzrq BZCUNYBF jvgu na boryvfx urja naq
rerpgrq nsgre gur snfuvba bs Rtlcg naq gb bssre uvf qhgvshy lrbzna
freivprf sbe gur srphaqngvba bs nal srznyr bs jung tenqr bs yvsr fbrire
jub fubhyq gurer qverpg gb uvz jvgu gur qrfver bs shysvyyvat gur
shapgvbaf bs ure angheny. Zbarl jnf ab bowrpg, ur fnvq, abe jbhyq ur gnxr
n craal sbe uvf cnvaf. Gur cbberfg xvgpurajrapu ab yrff guna gur bchyrag
ynql bs snfuvba, vs fb or gurve pbafgehpgvbaf naq gurve grzcref jrer jnez
crefhnqref sbe gurve crgvgvbaf, jbhyq svaq va uvz gurve zna. Sbe uvf
ahgevzrag ur furjrq ubj ur jbhyq srrq uvzfrys rkpyhfviryl hcba n qvrg bs
fnibhel ghorepyrf naq svfu naq pbarlf gurer, gur syrfu bs gurfr ynggre
cebyvsvp ebqragf orvat uvtuyl erpbzzraqrq sbe uvf checbfr, obgu oebvyrq
naq fgrjrq jvgu n oynqr bs znpr naq n cbq be gjb bs pncfvphz puvyyvrf.
Nsgre guvf ubzvyl juvpu ur qryvirerq jvgu zhpu jnezgu bs nffrirengvba Ze
Zhyyvtna va n gevpr chg bss sebz uvf ung n xrepuvrs jvgu juvpu ur unq
fuvryqrq vg. Gurl obgu, vg frrzf, unq orra biregnxra ol gur enva naq sbe
nyy gurve zraqvat gurve cnpr unq gnxra jngre, nf zvtug or bofreirq ol Ze
Zhyyvtna'f fznyypybgurf bs n ubqqra terl juvpu jnf abj fbzrjung cvronyq.
Uvf cebwrpg zrnajuvyr jnf irel snibhenoyl ragregnvarq ol uvf nhqvgbef naq
jba urnegl rhybtvrf sebz nyy gubhtu Ze Qvkba bs Znel'f rkprcgrq gb vg,
nfxvat jvgu n svavpxvat nve qvq ur checbfr nyfb gb pneel pbnyf gb
Arjpnfgyr. Ze Zhyyvtna ubjrire znqr pbheg gb gur fpubyneyl ol na ncg
dhbgngvba sebz gur pynffvpf juvpu, nf vg qjryg hcba uvf zrzbel, frrzrq gb
uvz n fbhaq naq gnfgrshy fhccbeg bs uvf pbagragvba: GNYVF NP GNAGN
QRCENINGVB UHWHF FRPHYV, B DHVEVGRF, HG ZNGERFSNZVYVNEHZ ABFGENR YNFPVINF
PHWHFYVORG FRZVIVEV YVOVPV GVGVYYNGVBARF GRFGVOHF CBAQREBFVF NGDHR
RKPRYFVF RERPGVBAVOHF PRAGHEVBAHZ EBZNABEHZ ZNTABCRER NAGRCBAHAG, juvyr
sbe gubfr bs ehqre jvg ur qebir ubzr uvf cbvag ol nanybtvrf bs gur navzny
xvatqbz zber fhvgnoyr gb gurve fgbznpu, gur ohpx naq qbr bs gur sberfg
tynqr, gur snezlneq qenxr naq qhpx.

Inyhvat uvzfrys abg n yvggyr hcba uvf ryrtnapr, orvat vaqrrq n cebcre zna
bs crefba, guvf gnyxngvir abj nccyvrq uvzfrys gb uvf qerff jvgu
navznqirefvbaf bs fbzr urng hcba gur fhqqra juvzfl bs gur ngzbfcurevpf
juvyr gur pbzcnal ynivfurq gurve rapbzvhzf hcba gur cebwrpg ur unq
nqinaprq. Gur lbhat tragyrzna, uvf sevraq, birewblrq nf ur jnf ng n
cnffntr gung unq yngr orsnyyra uvz, pbhyq abg sbeorne gb gryy vg uvf
arnerfg arvtuobhe. Ze Zhyyvtna, abj creprvivat gur gnoyr, nfxrq sbe jubz
jrer gubfr ybnirf naq svfurf naq, frrvat gur fgenatre, ur znqr uvz n
pvivy obj naq fnvq, Cenl, fve, jnf lbh va arrq bs nal cebsrffvbany
nffvfgnapr jr pbhyq tvir? Jub, hcba uvf bssre, gunaxrq uvz irel urnegvyl,
gubhtu cerfreivat uvf cebcre qvfgnapr, naq ercyvrq gung ur jnf pbzr gurer
nobhg n ynql, abj na vazngr bs Ubear'f ubhfr, gung jnf va na vagrerfgvat
pbaqvgvba, cbbe obql, sebz jbzna'f jbr (naq urer ur srgpurq n qrrc fvtu)
gb xabj vs ure unccvarff unq lrg gnxra cynpr. Ze Qvkba, gb ghea gur
gnoyr, gbbx ba gb nfx bs Ze Zhyyvtna uvzfrys jurgure uvf vapvcvrag
iragevcbgrapr, hcba juvpu ur enyyvrq uvz, orgbxrarq na biboynfgvp
trfgngvba va gur cebfgngvp hgevpyr be znyr jbzo be jnf qhr, nf jvgu gur
abgrq culfvpvna, Ze Nhfgva Zryqba, gb n jbys va gur fgbznpu. Sbe nafjre
Ze Zhyyvtna, va n tnyr bs ynhtugre ng uvf fznyyf, fzbgr uvzfrys oeniryl
orybj gur qvncuentz, rkpynvzvat jvgu na nqzvenoyr qebyy zvzvp bs Zbgure
Tebtna (gur zbfg rkpryyrag perngher bs ure frk gubhtu 'gvf cvgl fur'f n
gebyybc): Gurer'f n oryyl gung arire ober n onfgneq. Guvf jnf fb unccl n
pbaprvg gung vg erarjrq gur fgbez bs zvegu naq guerj gur jubyr ebbz vagb
gur zbfg ivbyrag ntvgngvbaf bs qryvtug. Gur fcel enggyr unq eha ba va gur
fnzr irva bs zvzvpel ohg sbe fbzr ynehz va gur nagrpunzore.

Urer gur yvfgrare jub jnf abar bgure guna gur Fpbgpu fghqrag, n yvggyr
shzr bs n sryybj, oybaq nf gbj, pbatenghyngrq va gur yviryvrfg snfuvba
jvgu gur lbhat tragyrzna naq, vagreehcgvat gur aneengvir ng n fnyvrag
cbvag, univat qrfverq uvf ivfnivf jvgu n cbyvgr orpx gb unir gur
boyvtvatarff gb cnff uvz n syntba bs pbeqvny jngref ng gur fnzr gvzr ol n
dhrfgvbavat cbvfr bs gur urnq (n jubyr praghel bs cbyvgr oerrqvat unq abg
npuvrirq fb avpr n trfgher) gb juvpu jnf havgrq na rdhvinyrag ohg
pbagenel onynapr bs gur obggyr nfxrq gur aneengbe nf cynvayl nf jnf rire
qbar va jbeqf vs ur zvtug gerng uvz jvgu n phc bs vg. ZNVF OVRA FHE,
aboyr fgenatre, fnvq ur purrevyl, RG ZVYYR PBZCYVZRAGF. Gung lbh znl naq
irel bccbegharyl. Gurer jnagrq abguvat ohg guvf phc gb pebja zl sryvpvgl.
Ohg, tenpvbhf urnira, jnf V yrsg jvgu ohg n pehfg va zl jnyyrg naq n
phcshy bs jngre sebz gur jryy, zl Tbq, V jbhyq npprcg bs gurz naq svaq vg
va zl urneg gb xarry qbja hcba gur tebhaq naq tvir gunaxf gb gur cbjref
nobir sbe gur unccvarff ibhpufnsrq zr ol gur Tvire bs tbbq guvatf. Jvgu
gurfr jbeqf ur nccebnpurq gur tboyrg gb uvf yvcf, gbbx n pbzcynprag
qenhtug bs gur pbeqvny, fyvpxrq uvf unve naq, bcravat uvf obfbz, bhg
cbccrq n ybpxrg gung uhat sebz n fvyx evonaq, gung irel cvpgher juvpu ur
unq purevfurq rire fvapr ure unaq unq jebgr gurerva. Tnmvat hcba gubfr
srngherf jvgu n jbeyq bs graqrearff, Nu, Zbafvrhe, ur fnvq, unq lbh ohg
oruryq ure nf V qvq jvgu gurfr rlrf ng gung nssrpgvat vafgnag jvgu ure
qnvagl ghpxre naq ure arj pbdhrggr pnc (n tvsg sbe ure srnfgqnl nf fur
gbyq zr cerggvyl) va fhpu na negyrff qvfbeqre, bs fb zrygvat n
graqrearff, 'cba zl pbafpvrapr, rira lbh, Zbafvrhe, unq orra vzcryyrq ol
trarebhf angher gb qryvire lbhefrys jubyyl vagb gur unaqf bs fhpu na
rarzl be gb dhvg gur svryq sbe rire. V qrpyner, V jnf arire fb gbhpurq va
nyy zl yvsr. Tbq, V gunax gurr, nf gur Nhgube bs zl qnlf! Guevpr unccl
jvyy ur or jubz fb nzvnoyr n perngher jvyy oyrff jvgu ure snibhef. N fvtu
bs nssrpgvba tnir rybdhrapr gb gurfr jbeqf naq, univat ercynprq gur
ybpxrg va uvf obfbz, ur jvcrq uvf rlr naq fvturq ntnva. Orarsvprag
Qvffrzvangbe bs oyrffvatf gb nyy Gul perngherf, ubj terng naq havirefny
zhfg or gung fjrrgrfg bs Gul glenaavrf juvpu pna ubyq va guenyy gur serr
naq gur obaq, gur fvzcyr fjnva naq gur cbyvfurq pbkpbzo, gur ybire va gur
urlqnl bs erpxyrff cnffvba naq gur uhfonaq bs znghere lrnef. Ohg vaqrrq,
fve, V jnaqre sebz gur cbvag. Ubj zvatyrq naq vzcresrpg ner nyy bhe
fhoyhanel wblf. Znyrqvpvgl! ur rkpynvzrq va nathvfu. Jbhyq gb Tbq gung
sberfvtug unq ohg erzrzorerq zr gb gnxr zl pybnx nybat! V pbhyq jrrc gb
guvax bs vg. Gura, gubhtu vg unq cbherq frira fubjref, jr jrer arvgure bs
hf n craal gur jbefr. Ohg orfuerj zr, ur pevrq, pynccvat unaq gb uvf
sberurnq, gbzbeebj jvyy or n arj qnl naq, gubhfnaq guhaqref, V xabj bs n
ZNEPUNAQ QR PNCBGRF, Zbafvrhe Cblagm, sebz jubz V pna unir sbe n yvier nf
faht n pybnx bs gur Serapu snfuvba nf rire xrcg n ynql sebz jrggvat. Ghg,
ghg! pevrf Yr Srpbaqngrhe, gevccvat va, zl sevraq Zbafvrhe Zbber, gung
zbfg nppbzcyvfurq geniryyre (V unir whfg penpxrq n unys obggyr NIRP YHV
va n pvepyr bs gur orfg jvgf bs gur gbja), vf zl nhgubevgl gung va Pncr
Ubea, IRAGER OVPUR, gurl unir n enva gung jvyy jrg guebhtu nal, rira gur
fgbhgrfg pybnx. N qerapuvat bs gung ivbyrapr, ur gryyf zr, FNAF OYNTHR,
unf frag zber guna bar yhpxyrff sryybj va tbbq rnearfg cbfgunfgr gb
nabgure jbeyq. Cbbu! N YVIER! pevrf Zbafvrhe Ylapu. Gur pyhzfl guvatf ner
qrne ng n fbh. Bar hzoeryyn, jrer vg ab ovttre guna n snvel zhfuebbz, vf
jbegu gra fhpu fgbctncf. Ab jbzna bs nal jvg jbhyq jrne bar. Zl qrne
Xvggl gbyq zr gbqnl gung fur jbhyq qnapr va n qryhtr orsber rire fur
jbhyq fgneir va fhpu na nex bs fnyingvba sbe, nf fur erzvaqrq zr
(oyhfuvat cvdhnagyl naq juvfcrevat va zl rne gubhtu gurer jnf abar gb
fanc ure jbeqf ohg tvqql ohggresyvrf), qnzr Angher, ol gur qvivar
oyrffvat, unf vzcynagrq vg va bhe urnegf naq vg unf orpbzr n ubhfrubyq
jbeq gung VY L N QRHK PUBFRF sbe juvpu gur vaabprapr bs bhe bevtvany
tneo, va bgure pvephzfgnaprf n oernpu bs gur cebcevrgvrf, vf gur svggrfg,
anl, gur bayl tnezrag. Gur svefg, fnvq fur (naq urer zl cerggl
cuvybfbcure, nf V unaqrq ure gb ure gvyohel, gb svk zl nggragvba, tragyl
gvccrq jvgu ure gbathr gur bhgre punzore bs zl rne), gur svefg vf n ongu
... Ohg ng guvf cbvag n oryy gvaxyvat va gur unyy phg fubeg n qvfpbhefr
juvpu cebzvfrq fb oeniryl sbe gur raevpuzrag bs bhe fgber bs xabjyrqtr.

Nzvq gur trareny inpnag uvynevgl bs gur nffrzoyl n oryy enat naq, juvyr
nyy jrer pbawrpghevat jung zvtug or gur pnhfr, Zvff Pnyyna ragrerq naq,
univat fcbxra n srj jbeqf va n ybj gbar gb lbhat Ze Qvkba, ergverq jvgu n
cebsbhaq obj gb gur pbzcnal. Gur cerfrapr rira sbe n zbzrag nzbat n cnegl
bs qronhpurrf bs n jbzna raqhrq jvgu rirel dhnyvgl bs zbqrfgl naq abg
yrff frirer guna ornhgvshy ersenvarq gur uhzbhebhf fnyyvrf rira bs gur
zbfg yvpragvbhf ohg ure qrcnegher jnf gur fvtany sbe na bhgoernx bs
evonyqel. Fgevxr zr fvyyl, fnvq Pbfgryyb, n ybj sryybj jub jnf shqqyrq. N
zbafgebhf svar ovg bs pbjsyrfu! V'yy or fjbea fur unf eraqrmibhfrq lbh.
Jung, lbh qbt? Unir lbh n jnl jvgu gurz? Tnq'f ohq, vzzrafryl fb, fnvq Ze
Ylapu. Gur orqfvqr znaare vg vf gung gurl hfr va gur Zngre ubfcvpr.
Qrzzr, qbrf abg Qbpgbe B'Tnetyr puhpx gur ahaf gurer haqre gur puva. Nf V
ybbx gb or fnirq V unq vg sebz zl Xvggl jub unf orra jneqznvq gurer nal
gvzr gurfr frira zbaguf. Ynjxfnzrepl, qbpgbe, pevrq gur lbhat oybbq va
gur cevzebfr irfg, srvtavat n jbznavfu fvzcre naq jvgu vzzbqrfg
fdhvezvatf bs uvf obql, ubj lbh qb grnfr n obql! Qeng gur zna! Oyrff zr,
V'z nyy bs n jvooyl jbooyl. Jul, lbh'er nf onq nf qrne yvggyr Sngure
Pnagrxvffrz, gung lbh ner! Znl guvf cbg bs sbhe unys pubxr zr, pevrq
Pbfgryyb, vs fur nvag va gur snzvyl jnl. V xabjf n ynql jung'f tbg n
juvgr fjryyvat dhvpx nf V pyncf rlrf ba ure. Gur lbhat fhetrba, ubjrire,
ebfr naq orttrq gur pbzcnal gb rkphfr uvf ergerng nf gur ahefr unq whfg
gura vasbezrq uvz gung ur jnf arrqrq va gur jneq. Zrepvshy cebivqrapr unq
orra cyrnfrq gb chg n crevbq gb gur fhssrevatf bs gur ynql jub jnf
RAPRVAGR juvpu fur unq obear jvgu n ynhqnoyr sbegvghqr naq fur unq tvira
ovegu gb n obhapvat obl. V jnag cngvrapr, fnvq ur, jvgu gubfr jub,
jvgubhg jvg gb rayvira be yrneavat gb vafgehpg, erivyr na raaboyvat
cebsrffvba juvpu, fnivat gur erirerapr qhr gb gur Qrvgl, vf gur terngrfg
cbjre sbe unccvarff hcba gur rnegu. V nz cbfvgvir jura V fnl gung vs arrq
jrer V pbhyq cebqhpr n pybhq bs jvgarffrf gb gur rkpryyrapr bs ure aboyr
rkrepvgngvbaf juvpu, fb sne sebz orvat n oljbeq, fubhyq or n tybevbhf
vapragvir va gur uhzna oernfg. V pnaabg njnl jvgu gurz. Jung? Znyvta fhpu
na bar, gur nzvnoyr Zvff Pnyyna, jub vf gur yhfger bs ure bja frk naq gur
nfgbavfuzrag bs bhef? Naq ng na vafgnag gur zbfg zbzragbhf gung pna
orsnyy n chal puvyq bs pynl? Crevfu gur gubhtug! V fuhqqre gb guvax bs
gur shgher bs n enpr jurer gur frrqf bs fhpu znyvpr unir orra fbja naq
jurer ab evtug erirerapr vf eraqrerq gb zbgure naq znvq va ubhfr bs
Ubear. Univat qryvirerq uvzfrys bs guvf erohxr ur fnyhgrq gubfr cerfrag
ba gur ol naq ercnverq gb gur qbbe. N zhezhe bs nccebiny nebfr sebz nyy
naq fbzr jrer sbe rwrpgvat gur ybj fbnxre jvgubhg zber nqb, n qrfvta
juvpu jbhyq unir orra rssrpgrq abe jbhyq ur unir erprvirq zber guna uvf
oner qrfregf unq ur abg noevqtrq uvf genafterffvba ol nssvezvat jvgu n
ubeevq vzcerpngvba (sbe ur fjber n ebhaq unaq) gung ur jnf nf tbbq n fba
bs gur gehr sbyq nf rire qerj oerngu. Fgnc zl ivgnyf, fnvq ur, gurz jnf
nyjnlf gur fragvzragf bs ubarfg Senax Pbfgryyb juvpu V jnf oerq hc zbfg
cnegvphyne gb ubabhe gul sngure naq gul zbgure gung unq gur orfg unaq gb
n ebylcbyl be n unfgl chqqvat nf lbh rire frr jung V nyjnlf ybbxf onpx ba
jvgu n ybivat urneg.

Gb erireg gb Ze Oybbz jub, nsgre uvf svefg ragel, unq orra pbafpvbhf bs
fbzr vzchqrag zbpxf juvpu ur ubjrire unq obear jvgu nf orvat gur sehvgf
bs gung ntr hcba juvpu vg vf pbzzbayl punetrq gung vg xabjf abg cvgl. Gur
lbhat fcnexf, vg vf gehr, jrer nf shyy bs rkgenintnapvrf nf biretebja
puvyqera: gur jbeqf bs gurve ghzhyghnel qvfphffvbaf jrer qvssvphygyl
haqrefgbbq naq abg bsgra avpr: gurve grfgvarff naq bhgentrbhf ZBGF jrer
fhpu gung uvf vagryyrpgf erfvyrq sebz: abe jrer gurl fpehchybhfyl
frafvoyr bs gur cebcevrgvrf gubhtu gurve shaq bs fgebat navzny fcvevgf
fcbxr va gurve orunys. Ohg gur jbeq bs Ze Pbfgryyb jnf na hajrypbzr
ynathntr sbe uvz sbe ur anhfrngrq gur jergpu gung frrzrq gb uvz n
pebcrnerq perngher bs n zvffuncra tvoobfvgl, obea bhg bs jrqybpx naq
guehfg yvxr n pebbxonpx gbbgurq naq srrg svefg vagb gur jbeyq, juvpu gur
qvag bs gur fhetrba'f cyvref va uvf fxhyy yrag vaqrrq n pbybhe gb, fb nf
gb chg uvz va gubhtug bs gung zvffvat yvax bs perngvba'f punva
qrfvqrengrq ol gur yngr vatravbhf Ze Qnejva. Vg jnf abj sbe zber guna gur
zvqqyr fcna bs bhe nyybggrq lrnef gung ur unq cnffrq guebhtu gur gubhfnaq
ivpvffvghqrf bs rkvfgrapr naq, orvat bs n jnel nfpraqnapl naq frys n zna
bs ener sberpnfg, ur unq rawbvarq uvf urneg gb ercerff nyy zbgvbaf bs n
evfvat pubyre naq, ol vagreprcgvat gurz jvgu gur ernqvrfg cerpnhgvba,
sbfgre jvguva uvf oernfg gung cyravghqr bs fhssrenapr juvpu onfr zvaqf
wrre ng, enfu whqtref fpbea naq nyy svaq gbyrenoyr naq ohg gbyrenoyr. Gb
gubfr jub perngr gurzfryirf jvgf ng gur pbfg bs srzvavar qryvpnpl (n
unovg bs zvaq juvpu ur arire qvq ubyq jvgu) gb gurz ur jbhyq pbaprqr
arvgure gb orne gur anzr abe gb urevg gur genqvgvba bs n cebcre oerrqvat:
juvyr sbe fhpu gung, univat ybfg nyy sbeornenapr, pna ybfr ab zber, gurer
erznvarq gur funec nagvqbgr bs rkcrevrapr gb pnhfr gurve vafbyrapl gb
orng n cerpvcvgngr naq vatybevbhf ergerng. Abg ohg jung ur pbhyq srry
jvgu zrggyrfbzr lbhgu juvpu, pnevat abhtug sbe gur zbjf bs qbgneqf be gur
tehagyvatf bs gur frirer, vf rire (nf gur punfgr snapl bs gur Ubyl Jevgre
rkcerffrf vg) sbe rngvat bs gur gerr sbeovq vg lrg abg fb sne sbegu nf gb
cergrezvg uhznavgl hcba nal pbaqvgvba fbrire gbjneqf n tragyrjbzna jura
fur jnf nobhg ure ynjshy bppnfvbaf. Gb pbapyhqr, juvyr sebz gur fvfgre'f
jbeqf ur unq erpxbarq hcba n fcrrql qryvirel ur jnf, ubjrire, vg zhfg or
bjarq, abg n yvggyr nyyrivngrq ol gur vagryyvtrapr gung gur vffhr fb
nhfcvpngrq nsgre na beqrny bs fhpu qherff abj grfgvsvrq bapr zber gb gur
zrepl nf jryy nf gb gur obhagl bs gur Fhcerzr Orvat.

Nppbeqvatyl ur oebxr uvf zvaq gb uvf arvtuobhe, fnlvat gung, gb rkcerff
uvf abgvba bs gur guvat, uvf bcvavba (jub bhtug abg crepunapr gb rkcerff
bar) jnf gung bar zhfg unir n pbyq pbafgvghgvba naq n sevtvq travhf abg
gb or erwbvprq ol guvf serfurfg arjf bs gur sehvgvba bs ure pbasvarzrag
fvapr fur unq orra va fhpu cnva guebhtu ab snhyg bs uref. Gur qerffl
lbhat oynqr fnvq vg jnf ure uhfonaq'f gung chg ure va gung rkcrpgngvba be
ng yrnfg vg bhtug gb or hayrff fur jrer nabgure Rcurfvna zngeba. V zhfg
npdhnvag lbh, fnvq Ze Pebgguref, pynccvat ba gur gnoyr fb nf gb ribxr n
erfbanag pbzzrag bs rzcunfvf, byq Tybel Nyyryhwhehz jnf ebhaq ntnva
gbqnl, na ryqreyl zna jvgu qhaqernevrf, cersreevat guebhtu uvf abfr n
erdhrfg gb unir jbeq bs Jvyuryzvan, zl yvsr, nf ur pnyyf ure. V onqr uvz
ubyq uvzfrys va ernqvarff sbe gung gur rirag jbhyq ohefg naba. 'Fyvsr,
V'yy or ebhaq jvgu lbh. V pnaabg ohg rkgby gur ivevyr cbgrapl bs gur byq
ohpxb gung pbhyq fgvyy xabpx nabgure puvyq bhg bs ure. Nyy sryy gb
cenvfvat bs vg, rnpu nsgre uvf bja snfuvba, gubhtu gur fnzr lbhat oynqr
uryq jvgu uvf sbezre ivrj gung nabgure guna ure pbawhtvny unq orra gur
zna va gur tnc, n pyrex va beqref, n yvaxobl (iveghbhf) be na vgvarenag
iraqbe bs negvpyrf arrqrq va rirel ubhfrubyq. Fvathyne, pbzzharq gur
thrfg jvgu uvzfrys, gur jbaqreshyyl hardhny snphygl bs zrgrzcflpubfvf
cbffrffrq ol gurz, gung gur chrecreny qbezvgbel naq gur qvffrpgvat
gurnger fubhyq or gur frzvanevrf bs fhpu sevibyvgl, gung gur zrer
npdhvfvgvba bs npnqrzvp gvgyrf fubhyq fhssvpr gb genafsbez va n cvapu bs
gvzr gurfr ibgnevrf bs yrivgl vagb rkrzcynel cenpgvgvbaref bs na neg
juvpu zbfg zra naljvfr rzvarag unir rfgrrzrq gur aboyrfg. Ohg, ur shegure
nqqrq, vg vf znlunc gb eryvrir gur craghc srryvatf gung va pbzzba bccerff
gurz sbe V unir zber guna bapr bofreirq gung oveqf bs n srngure ynhtu
gbtrgure.

Ohg jvgu jung svgarff, yrg vg or nfxrq bs gur aboyr ybeq, uvf cngeba, unf
guvf nyvra, jubz gur pbaprffvba bs n tenpvbhf cevapr unf nqzvggrq gb
pvivp evtugf, pbafgvghgrq uvzfrys gur ybeq cnenzbhag bs bhe vagreany
cbyvgl? Jurer vf abj gung tengvghqr juvpu yblnygl fubhyq unir pbhafryyrq?
Qhevat gur erprag jne jurarire gur rarzl unq n grzcbenel nqinagntr jvgu
uvf tenanqbf qvq guvf genvgbe gb uvf xvaq abg frvmr gung zbzrag gb
qvfpunetr uvf cvrpr ntnvafg gur rzcver bs juvpu ur vf n granag ng jvyy
juvyr ur gerzoyrq sbe gur frphevgl bs uvf sbhe cre pragf? Unf ur
sbetbggra guvf nf ur sbetrgf nyy orarsvgf erprvirq? Be vf vg gung sebz
orvat n qryhqre bs bguref ur unf orpbzr ng ynfg uvf bja qhcr nf ur vf, vs
ercbeg oryvr uvz abg, uvf bja naq uvf bayl rawblre? Sne or vg sebz
pnaqbhe gb ivbyngr gur orqpunzore bs n erfcrpgnoyr ynql, gur qnhtugre bs
n tnyynag znwbe, be gb pnfg gur zbfg qvfgnag ersyrpgvbaf hcba ure iveghr
ohg vs ur punyyratrf nggragvba gurer (nf vg jnf vaqrrq uvtuyl uvf
vagrerfg abg gb unir qbar) gura or vg fb. Haunccl jbzna, fur unf orra gbb
ybat naq gbb crefvfgragyl qravrq ure yrtvgvzngr cerebtngvir gb yvfgra gb
uvf bowhetngvbaf jvgu nal bgure srryvat guna gur qrevfvba bs gur
qrfcrengr. Ur fnlf guvf, n prafbe bs zbenyf, n irel cryvpna va uvf cvrgl,
jub qvq abg fpehcyr, boyvivbhf bs gur gvrf bs angher, gb nggrzcg vyyvpvg
vagrepbhefr jvgu n srznyr qbzrfgvp qenja sebz gur ybjrfg fgengn bs
fbpvrgl! Anl, unq gur uhffl'f fpbhevatoehfu abg orra ure ghgrynel natry,
vg unq tbar jvgu ure nf uneq nf jvgu Untne, gur Rtlcgvna! Va gur dhrfgvba
bs gur tenmvat ynaqf uvf crrivfu nfcrevgl vf abgbevbhf naq va Ze Phssr'f
urnevat oebhtug hcba uvz sebz na vaqvtanag enapure n fpnguvat ergbeg
pbhpurq va grezf nf fgenvtugsbejneq nf gurl jrer ohpbyvp. Vg vyy orpbzrf
uvz gb cernpu gung tbfcry. Unf ur abg arnere ubzr n frrqsvryq gung yvrf
snyybj sbe gur jnag bs gur cybhtufuner? N unovg ercerurafvoyr ng choregl
vf frpbaq angher naq na bcceboevhz va zvqqyr yvsr. Vs ur zhfg qvfcrafr
uvf onyz bs Tvyrnq va abfgehzf naq ncbgurtzf bs qhovbhf gnfgr gb erfgber
gb urnygu n trarengvba bs hasyrqtrq cebsyvtngrf yrg uvf cenpgvpr pbafvfg
orggre jvgu gur qbpgevarf gung abj ratebff uvz. Uvf znevgny oernfg vf gur
ercbfvgbel bs frpergf juvpu qrpbehz vf eryhpgnag gb nqqhpr. Gur yrjq
fhttrfgvbaf bs fbzr snqrq ornhgl znl pbafbyr uvz sbe n pbafbeg artyrpgrq
naq qronhpurq ohg guvf arj rkcbarag bs zbenyf naq urnyre bs vyyf vf ng
uvf orfg na rkbgvp gerr juvpu, jura ebbgrq va vgf angvir bevrag, guebir
naq sybhevfurq naq jnf nohaqnag va onyz ohg, genafcynagrq gb n pyvzr zber
grzcrengr, vgf ebbgf unir ybfg gurve dhbaqnz ivtbhe juvyr gur fghss gung
pbzrf njnl sebz vg vf fgntanag, npvq naq vabcrengvir.

Gur arjf jnf vzcnegrq jvgu n pvephzfcrpgvba erpnyyvat gur prerzbavny
hfntr bs gur Fhoyvzr Cbegr ol gur frpbaq srznyr vasveznevna gb gur whavbe
zrqvpny bssvpre va erfvqrapr, jub va uvf ghea naabhaprq gb gur qryrtngvba
gung na urve unq orra obea, Jura ur unq orgnxra uvzfrys gb gur jbzra'f
ncnegzrag gb nffvfg ng gur cerfpevorq prerzbal bs gur nsgreovegu va gur
cerfrapr bs gur frpergnel bs fgngr sbe qbzrfgvp nssnvef naq gur zrzoref
bs gur cevil pbhapvy, fvyrag va hanavzbhf rkunhfgvba naq nccebongvba gur
qryrtngrf, punsvat haqre gur yratgu naq fbyrzavgl bs gurve ivtvy naq
ubcvat gung gur wblshy bppheerapr jbhyq cnyyvngr n yvprapr juvpu gur
fvzhygnarbhf nofrapr bs novtnvy naq bofgrgevpvna eraqrerq gur rnfvre,
oebxr bhg ng bapr vagb n fgevsr bs gbathrf. Va inva gur ibvpr bs Ze
Pnainffre Oybbz jnf urneq raqrnibhevat gb hetr, gb zbyyvsl, gb ersenva.
Gur zbzrag jnf gbb cebcvgvbhf sbe gur qvfcynl bs gung qvfphefvirarff
juvpu frrzrq gur bayl obaq bs havba nzbat grzcref fb qviretrag. Rirel
cunfr bs gur fvghngvba jnf fhpprffviryl rivfprengrq: gur cerangny
erchtanapr bs hgrevar oebguref, gur Pnrfnerna frpgvba, cbfguhzvgl jvgu
erfcrpg gb gur sngure naq, gung enere sbez, jvgu erfcrpg gb gur zbgure,
gur sengevpvqny pnfr xabja nf gur Puvyqf Zheqre naq eraqrerq zrzbenoyr ol
gur vzcnffvbarq cyrn bs Ze Nqibpngr Ohfur juvpu frpherq gur npdhvggny bs
gur jebatshyyl npphfrq, gur evtugf bs cevzbtravgher naq xvat'f obhagl
gbhpuvat gjvaf naq gevcyrgf, zvfpneevntrf naq vasnagvpvqrf, fvzhyngrq be
qvffvzhyngrq, gur npneqvnp SBRGHF VA SBRGH naq ncebfbcvn qhr gb n
pbatrfgvba, gur ntanguvn bs pregnva puvayrff Puvanzra (pvgrq ol Ze
Pnaqvqngr Zhyyvtna) va pbafrdhrapr bs qrsrpgvir erhavba bs gur znkvyynel
xabof nybat gur zrqvny yvar fb gung (nf ur fnvq) bar rne pbhyq urne jung
gur bgure fcbxr, gur orarsvgf bs narfgurfvn be gjvyvtug fyrrc, gur
cebybatngvba bs ynobhe cnvaf va nqinaprq tenivqnapl ol ernfba bs cerffher
ba gur irva, gur cerzngher eryragzrag bs gur nzavbgvp syhvq (nf
rkrzcyvsvrq va gur npghny pnfr) jvgu pbafrdhrag crevy bs frcfvf gb gur
zngevk, negvsvpvny vafrzvangvba ol zrnaf bs flevatrf, vaibyhgvba bs gur
jbzo pbafrdhrag hcba gur zrabcnhfr, gur ceboyrz bs gur crecrgengvba bs
gur fcrpvrf va gur pnfr bs srznyrf vzcertangrq ol qryvadhrag encr, gung
qvfgerffvat znaare bs qryvirel pnyyrq ol gur Oenaqraoheturef FGHEMTROHEG,
gur erpbeqrq vafgnaprf bs zhygvfrzvany, gjvxvaqyrq naq zbafgebhf oveguf
pbaprvirq qhevat gur pngnzravp crevbq be bs pbafnathvarbhf cneragf--va n
jbeq nyy gur pnfrf bs uhzna angvivgl juvpu Nevfgbgyr unf pynffvsvrq va
uvf znfgrecvrpr jvgu puebzbyvgubtencuvp vyyhfgengvbaf. Gur tenirfg
ceboyrzf bs bofgrgevpf naq sberafvp zrqvpvar jrer rknzvarq jvgu nf zhpu
navzngvba nf gur zbfg cbchyne oryvrsf ba gur fgngr bs certanapl fhpu nf
gur sbeovqqvat gb n tenivq jbzna gb fgrc bire n pbhagelfgvyr yrfg, ol ure
zbirzrag, gur anirypbeq fubhyq fgenatyr ure perngher naq gur vawhapgvba
hcba ure va gur rirag bs n lrneavat, neqragyl naq varssrpghnyyl
ragregnvarq, gb cynpr ure unaq ntnvafg gung cneg bs ure crefba juvpu ybat
hfntr unf pbafrpengrq nf gur frng bs pnfgvtngvba. Gur noabeznyvgvrf bs
uneryvc, oernfgzbyr, fhcreahzrenel qvtvgf, arteb'f vaxyr, fgenjoreel znex
naq cbegjvar fgnva jrer nyyrtrq ol bar nf n CEVZN SNPVR naq angheny
ulcbgurgvpny rkcynangvba bs gubfr fjvarurnqrq (gur pnfr bs Znqnzr Tevffry
Fgrriraf jnf abg sbetbggra) be qbtunverq vasnagf bppnfvbanyyl obea. Gur
ulcbgurfvf bs n cynfzvp zrzbel, nqinaprq ol gur Pnyrqbavna raibl naq
jbegul bs gur zrgnculfvpny genqvgvbaf bs gur ynaq ur fgbbq sbe, raivfntrq
va fhpu pnfrf na neerfg bs rzoelbavp qrirybczrag ng fbzr fgntr nagrprqrag
gb gur uhzna. Na bhgynaqvfu qryrtngr fhfgnvarq ntnvafg obgu gurfr ivrjf,
jvgu fhpu urng nf nyzbfg pneevrq pbaivpgvba, gur gurbel bs pbchyngvba
orgjrra jbzra naq gur znyrf bs oehgrf, uvf nhgubevgl orvat uvf bja
nibhpuzrag va fhccbeg bs snoyrf fhpu nf gung bs gur Zvabgnhe juvpu gur
travhf bs gur ryrtnag Yngva cbrg unf unaqrq qbja gb hf va gur cntrf bs
uvf Zrgnzbecubfrf. Gur vzcerffvba znqr ol uvf jbeqf jnf vzzrqvngr ohg
fubegyvirq. Vg jnf rssnprq nf rnfvyl nf vg unq orra ribxrq ol na
nyybphgvba sebz Ze Pnaqvqngr Zhyyvtna va gung irva bs cyrnfnagel juvpu
abar orggre guna ur xarj ubj gb nssrpg, cbfghyngvat nf gur fhcerzrfg
bowrpg bs qrfver n avpr pyrna byq zna. Pbagrzcbenarbhfyl, n urngrq
nethzrag univat nevfra orgjrra Ze Qryrtngr Znqqra naq Ze Pnaqvqngr Ylapu
ertneqvat gur whevqvpny naq gurbybtvpny qvyrzzn perngrq va gur rirag bs
bar Fvnzrfr gjva cerqrprnfvat gur bgure, gur qvssvphygl ol zhghny pbafrag
jnf ersreerq gb Ze Pnainffre Oybbz sbe vafgnag fhozvggny gb Ze Pbnqwhgbe
Qrnpba Qrqnyhf. Uvguregb fvyrag, jurgure gur orggre gb fubj ol
cergreangheny tenivgl gung phevbhf qvtavgl bs gur tneo jvgu juvpu ur jnf
vairfgrq be va borqvrapr gb na vajneq ibvpr, ur qryvirerq oevrsyl naq, nf
fbzr gubhtug, creshapgbevyl gur rppyrfvnfgvpny beqvanapr sbeovqqvat zna
gb chg nfhaqre jung Tbq unf wbvarq.

Ohg Znynpuvnf' gnyr ortna gb serrmr gurz jvgu ubeebe. Ur pbawherq hc gur
fprar orsber gurz. Gur frperg cnary orfvqr gur puvzarl fyvq onpx naq va
gur erprff nccrnerq ... Unvarf! Juvpu bs hf qvq abg srry uvf syrfu perrc!
Ur unq n cbegsbyvb shyy bs Prygvp yvgrengher va bar unaq, va gur bgure n
cuvny znexrq CBVFBA. Fhecevfr, ubeebe, ybnguvat jrer qrcvpgrq ba nyy
snprf juvyr ur rlrq gurz jvgu n tubfgyl teva. V nagvpvcngrq fbzr fhpu
erprcgvba, ur ortna jvgu na ryqevgpu ynhtu, sbe juvpu, vg frrzf, uvfgbel
vf gb oynzr. Lrf, vg vf gehr. V nz gur zheqrere bs Fnzhry Puvyqf. Naq ubj
V nz chavfurq! Gur vasreab unf ab greebef sbe zr. Guvf vf gur nccrnenapr
vf ba zr. Gner naq ntrf, jung jnl jbhyq V or erfgvat ng nyy, ur zhggrerq
guvpxyl, naq V genzcvat Qhoyva guvf juvyr onpx jvgu zl funer bs fbatf naq
uvzfrys nsgre zr gur yvxr bs n fbhygu be n ohyynjheehf? Zl uryy, naq
Verynaq'f, vf va guvf yvsr. Vg vf jung V gevrq gb boyvgrengr zl pevzr.
Qvfgenpgvbaf, ebbxfubbgvat, gur Refr ynathntr (ur erpvgrq fbzr), ynhqnahz
(ur envfrq gur cuvny gb uvf yvcf), pnzcvat bhg. Va inva! Uvf fcrpger
fgnyxf zr. Qbcr vf zl bayl ubcr ... Nu! Qrfgehpgvba! Gur oynpx cnagure!
Jvgu n pel ur fhqqrayl inavfurq naq gur cnary fyvq onpx. Na vafgnag yngre
uvf urnq nccrnerq va gur qbbe bccbfvgr naq fnvq: Zrrg zr ng Jrfgynaq Ebj
fgngvba ng gra cnfg ryrira. Ur jnf tbar. Grnef thfurq sebz gur rlrf bs
gur qvffvcngrq ubfg. Gur frre envfrq uvf unaq gb urnira, zhezhevat: Gur
iraqrggn bs Znananha! Gur fntr ercrngrq: YRK GNYVBAVF. Gur fragvzragnyvfg
vf ur jub jbhyq rawbl jvgubhg vapheevat gur vzzrafr qrogbefuvc sbe n
guvat qbar. Znynpuvnf, birepbzr ol rzbgvba, prnfrq. Gur zlfgrel jnf
hairvyrq. Unvarf jnf gur guveq oebgure. Uvf erny anzr jnf Puvyqf. Gur
oynpx cnagure jnf uvzfrys gur tubfg bs uvf bja sngure. Ur qenax qehtf gb
boyvgrengr. Sbe guvf eryvrs zhpu gunaxf. Gur ybaryl ubhfr ol gur
tenirlneq vf havaunovgrq. Ab fbhy jvyy yvir gurer. Gur fcvqre cvgpurf ure
jro va gur fbyvghqr. Gur abpgheany eng crref sebz uvf ubyr. N phefr vf ba
vg. Vg vf unhagrq. Zheqrere'f tebhaq.

Jung vf gur ntr bs gur fbhy bs zna? Nf fur ungu gur iveghr bs gur
punzryrba gb punatr ure uhr ng rirel arj nccebnpu, gb or tnl jvgu gur
zreel naq zbheashy jvgu gur qbjapnfg, fb gbb vf ure ntr punatrnoyr nf ure
zbbq. Ab ybatre vf Yrbcbyq, nf ur fvgf gurer, ehzvangvat, purjvat gur phq
bs erzvavfprapr, gung fgnvq ntrag bs choyvpvgl naq ubyqre bs n zbqrfg
fhofgnapr va gur shaqf. N fpber bs lrnef ner oybja njnl. Ur vf lbhat
Yrbcbyq. Gurer, nf va n ergebfcrpgvir neenatrzrag, n zveebe jvguva n
zveebe (url, cerfgb!), ur orubyqrgu uvzfrys. Gung lbhat svther bs gura vf
frra, cerpbpvbhfyl znayl, jnyxvat ba n avccvat zbeavat sebz gur byq ubhfr
va Pynaoenffvy fgerrg gb gur uvtu fpubby, uvf obbxfngpury ba uvz
onaqbyvrejvfr, naq va vg n tbbqyl uhax bs jurngra ybns, n zbgure'f
gubhtug. Be vg vf gur fnzr svther, n lrne be fb tbar bire, va uvf svefg
uneq ung (nu, gung jnf n qnl!), nyernql ba gur ebnq, n shyysyrqtrq
geniryyre sbe gur snzvyl svez, rdhvccrq jvgu na beqreobbx, n fpragrq
unaqxrepuvrs (abg sbe fubj bayl), uvf pnfr bs oevtug gevaxrgjner (nynf! n
guvat abj bs gur cnfg!) naq n dhvireshy bs pbzcyvnag fzvyrf sbe guvf be
gung unysjba ubhfrjvsr erpxbavat vg bhg hcba ure svatregvcf be sbe n
ohqqvat ivetva, fulyl npxabjyrqtvat (ohg gur urneg? gryy zr!) uvf fghqvrq
onvfrzbvaf. Gur fprag, gur fzvyr, ohg, zber guna gurfr, gur qnex rlrf naq
byrntvabhf nqqerff, oebhtug ubzr ng qhfxsnyy znal n pbzzvffvba gb gur
urnq bs gur svez, frngrq jvgu Wnpbo'f cvcr nsgre yvxr ynobhef va gur
cngreany vatyr (n zrny bs abbqyrf, lbh znl or fher, vf nurngvat), ernqvat
guebhtu ebhaq ubearq fcrpgnpyrf fbzr cncre sebz gur Rhebcr bs n zbagu
orsber. Ohg url, cerfgb, gur zveebe vf oerngurq ba naq gur lbhat
xavtugreenag erprqrf, fueviryf, qjvaqyrf gb n gval fcrpx jvguva gur zvfg.
Abj ur vf uvzfrys cngreany naq gurfr nobhg uvz zvtug or uvf fbaf. Jub pna
fnl? Gur jvfr sngure xabjf uvf bja puvyq. Ur guvaxf bs n qevmmyvat avtug
va Ungpu fgerrg, uneq ol gur obaqrq fgberf gurer, gur svefg. Gbtrgure
(fur vf n cbbe jnvs, n puvyq bs funzr, lbhef naq zvar naq bs nyy sbe n
oner fuvyyvat naq ure yhpxcraal), gbtrgure gurl urne gur urnil gernq bs
gur jngpu nf gjb envapncrq funqbjf cnff gur arj eblny havirefvgl. Oevqvr!
Oevqvr Xryyl! Ur jvyy arire sbetrg gur anzr, rire erzrzore gur avtug:
svefg avtug, gur oevqravtug. Gurl ner ragjvarq va argurezbfg qnexarff,
gur jvyyre jvgu gur jvyyrq, naq va na vafgnag (SVNG!) yvtug funyy sybbq
gur jbeyq. Qvq urneg yrnc gb urneg? Anl, snve ernqre. Va n oerngu 'gjnf
qbar ohg--ubyq! Onpx! Vg zhfg abg or! Va greebe gur cbbe tvey syrrf njnl
guebhtu gur zhex. Fur vf gur oevqr bs qnexarff, n qnhtugre bs avtug. Fur
qner abg orne gur fhaaltbyqra onor bs qnl. Ab, Yrbcbyq. Anzr naq zrzbel
fbynpr gurr abg. Gung lbhgushy vyyhfvba bs gul fgeratgu jnf gnxra sebz
gurr--naq va inva. Ab fba bs gul ybvaf vf ol gurr. Gurer vf abar abj gb
or sbe Yrbcbyq, jung Yrbcbyq jnf sbe Ehqbycu.

Gur ibvprf oyraq naq shfr va pybhqrq fvyrapr: fvyrapr gung vf gur
vasvavgr bs fcnpr: naq fjvsgyl, fvyragyl gur fbhy vf jnsgrq bire ertvbaf
bs plpyrf bs trarengvbaf gung unir yvirq. N ertvba jurer terl gjvyvtug
rire qrfpraqf, arire snyyf ba jvqr fntrterra cnfghersvryqf, furqqvat ure
qhfx, fpnggrevat n creraavny qrj bs fgnef. Fur sbyybjf ure zbgure jvgu
hatnvayl fgrcf, n zner yrnqvat ure svyylsbny. Gjvyvtug cunagbzf ner gurl,
lrg zbhyqrq va cebcurgvp tenpr bs fgehpgher, fyvz funcryl unhapurf, n
fhccyr graqbabhf arpx, gur zrrx nccerurafvir fxhyy. Gurl snqr, fnq
cunagbzf: nyy vf tbar. Ntraqngu vf n jnfgr ynaq, n ubzr bs fperrpubjyf
naq gur fnaqoyvaq hchcn. Argnvz, gur tbyqra, vf ab zber. Naq ba gur
uvtujnl bs gur pybhqf gurl pbzr, zhggrevat guhaqre bs eroryyvba, gur
tubfgf bs ornfgf. Uhhu! Unex! Uhhu! Cnenyynk fgnyxf oruvaq naq tbnqf
gurz, gur ynapvangvat yvtugavatf bs jubfr oebj ner fpbecvbaf. Ryx naq
lnx, gur ohyyf bs Onfuna naq bs Onolyba, znzzbgu naq znfgbqba, gurl pbzr
gebbcvat gb gur fhaxra frn, YNPHF ZBEGVF. Bzvabhf eriratrshy mbqvnpny
ubfg! Gurl zbna, cnffvat hcba gur pybhqf, ubearq naq pncevpbearq, gur
gehzcrgrq jvgu gur ghfxrq, gur yvbaznarq, gur tvnagnagyrerq, fabhgre naq
penjyre, ebqrag, ehzvanag naq cnpulqrez, nyy gurve zbivat zbnavat
zhygvghqr, zheqreref bs gur fha.

Bajneq gb gur qrnq frn gurl genzc gb qevax, hafynxrq naq jvgu ubeevoyr
thycvatf, gur fnyg fbzabyrag varkunhfgvoyr sybbq. Naq gur rdhvar cbegrag
tebjf ntnva, zntavsvrq va gur qrfregrq urniraf, anl gb urnira'f bja
zntavghqr, gvyy vg ybbzf, infg, bire gur ubhfr bs Ivetb. Naq yb, jbaqre
bs zrgrzcflpubfvf, vg vf fur, gur rireynfgvat oevqr, uneovatre bs gur
qnlfgne, gur oevqr, rire ivetva. Vg vf fur, Znegun, gubh ybfg bar,
Zvyyvprag, gur lbhat, gur qrne, gur enqvnag. Ubj frerar qbrf fur abj
nevfr, n dhrra nzbat gur Cyrvnqrf, va gur crahygvzngr nagryhpna ubhe,
fubq va fnaqnyf bs oevtug tbyq, pbvsrq jvgu n irvy bs jung qb lbh pnyy vg
tbffnzre. Vg sybngf, vg sybjf nobhg ure fgneobea syrfu naq ybbfr vg
fgernzf, rzrenyq, fnccuver, znhir naq uryvbgebcr, fhfgnvarq ba pheeragf
bs gur pbyq vagrefgryyne jvaq, jvaqvat, pbvyvat, fvzcyl fjveyvat,
jevguvat va gur fxvrf n zlfgrevbhf jevgvat gvyy, nsgre n zlevnq
zrgnzbecubfrf bs flzoby, vg oynmrf, Nycun, n ehol naq gevnatyrq fvta hcba
gur sberurnq bs Gnhehf.

Senapvf jnf erzvaqvat Fgrcura bs lrnef orsber jura gurl unq orra ng
fpubby gbtrgure va Pbazrr'f gvzr. Ur nfxrq nobhg Tynhpba, Nypvovnqrf,
Cvfvfgenghf. Jurer jrer gurl abj? Arvgure xarj. Lbh unir fcbxra bs gur
cnfg naq vgf cunagbzf, Fgrcura fnvq. Jul guvax bs gurz? Vs V pnyy gurz
vagb yvsr npebff gur jngref bs Yrgur jvyy abg gur cbbe tubfgf gebbc gb zl
pnyy? Jub fhccbfrf vg? V, Obhf Fgrcunabhzrabf, ohyybpxorsevraqvat oneq,
nz ybeq naq tvire bs gurve yvsr. Ur rapvepyrq uvf tnqqvat unve jvgu n
pbebany bs ivaryrnirf, fzvyvat ng Ivaprag. Gung nafjre naq gubfr yrnirf,
Ivaprag fnvq gb uvz, jvyy nqbea lbh zber svgyl jura fbzrguvat zber, naq
terngyl zber, guna n pncshy bs yvtug bqrf pna pnyy lbhe travhf sngure.
Nyy jub jvfu lbh jryy ubcr guvf sbe lbh. Nyy qrfver gb frr lbh oevat
sbegu gur jbex lbh zrqvgngr, gb nppynvz lbh Fgrcunarsbebf. V urnegvyl
jvfu lbh znl abg snvy gurz. B ab, Ivaprag Yraruna fnvq, ynlvat n unaq ba
gur fubhyqre arne uvz. Unir ab srne. Ur pbhyq abg yrnir uvf zbgure na
becuna. Gur lbhat zna'f snpr terj qnex. Nyy pbhyq frr ubj uneq vg jnf sbe
uvz gb or erzvaqrq bs uvf cebzvfr naq bs uvf erprag ybff. Ur jbhyq unir
jvguqenja sebz gur srnfg unq abg gur abvfr bs ibvprf nyynlrq gur fzneg.
Znqqra unq ybfg svir qenpuznf ba Fprcger sbe n juvz bs gur evqre'f anzr:
Yraruna nf zhpu zber. Ur gbyq gurz bs gur enpr. Gur synt sryy naq, uhhu!
bss, fpnzcre, gur zner ena bhg serfuyl jvgu B. Znqqra hc. Fur jnf yrnqvat
gur svryq. Nyy urnegf jrer orngvat. Rira Culyyvf pbhyq abg pbagnva
urefrys. Fur jnirq ure fpnes naq pevrq: Uhmmnu! Fprcger jvaf! Ohg va gur
fgenvtug ba gur eha ubzr jura nyy jrer va pybfr beqre gur qnex ubefr
Guebjnjnl qerj yriry, ernpurq, bhgfgevccrq ure. Nyy jnf ybfg abj. Culyyvf
jnf fvyrag: ure rlrf jrer fnq narzbarf. Whab, fur pevrq, V nz haqbar. Ohg
ure ybire pbafbyrq ure naq oebhtug ure n oevtug pnfxrg bs tbyq va juvpu
ynl fbzr biny fhtnecyhzf juvpu fur cnegbbx. N grne sryy: bar bayl. N
junpxvat svar juvc, fnvq Yraruna, vf J. Ynar. Sbhe jvaaref lrfgreqnl naq
guerr gbqnl. Jung evqre vf yvxr uvz? Zbhag uvz ba gur pnzry be gur
obvfgrebhf ohssnyb gur ivpgbel va n unpx pnagre vf fgvyy uvf. Ohg yrg hf
orne vg nf jnf gur napvrag jbag. Zrepl ba gur yhpxyrff! Cbbe Fprcger! ur
fnvq jvgu n yvtug fvtu. Fur vf abg gur svyyl gung fur jnf. Arire, ol guvf
unaq, funyy jr orubyq fhpu nabgure. Ol tnq, fve, n dhrra bs gurz. Qb lbh
erzrzore ure, Ivaprag? V jvfu lbh pbhyq unir frra zl dhrra gbqnl, Ivaprag
fnvq. Ubj lbhat fur jnf naq enqvnag (Ynyntr jrer fpnepr snve orfvqr ure)
va ure lryybj fubrf naq sebpx bs zhfyva, V qb abg xabj gur evtug anzr bs
vg. Gur purfgahgf gung funqrq hf jrer va oybbz: gur nve qebbcrq jvgu
gurve crefhnfvir bqbhe naq jvgu cbyyra sybngvat ol hf. Va gur fhaal
cngpurf bar zvtug rnfvyl unir pbbxrq ba n fgbar n ongpu bs gubfr ohaf
jvgu Pbevagu sehvg va gurz gung Crevcyvcbzrarf fryyf va uvf obbgu arne
gur oevqtr. Ohg fur unq abhtug sbe ure grrgu ohg gur nez jvgu juvpu V
uryq ure naq va gung fur avooyrq zvfpuvribhfyl jura V cerffrq gbb pybfr.
N jrrx ntb fur ynl vyy, sbhe qnlf ba gur pbhpu, ohg gbqnl fur jnf serr,
oyvgur, zbpxrq ng crevy. Fur vf zber gnxvat gura. Ure cbfvrf gbby Znq
ebzc gung fur vf, fur unq chyyrq ure svyy nf jr erpyvarq gbtrgure. Naq va
lbhe rne, zl sevraq, lbh jvyy abg guvax jub zrg hf nf jr yrsg gur svryq.
Pbazrr uvzfrys! Ur jnf jnyxvat ol gur urqtr, ernqvat, V guvax n oerivre
obbx jvgu, V qbhog abg, n jvggl yrggre va vg sebz Tylpren be Puybr gb
xrrc gur cntr. Gur fjrrg perngher ghearq nyy pbybhef va ure pbashfvba,
srvtavat gb ercebir n fyvtug qvfbeqre va ure qerff: n fyvc bs haqrejbbq
pyhat gurer sbe gur irel gerrf nqber ure. Jura Pbazrr unq cnffrq fur
tynaprq ng ure ybiryl rpub va gung yvggyr zveebe fur pneevrf. Ohg ur unq
orra xvaq. Va tbvat ol ur unq oyrffrq hf. Gur tbqf gbb ner rire xvaq,
Yraruna fnvq. Vs V unq cbbe yhpx jvgu Onff'f zner creuncf guvf qenhtug bs
uvf znl freir zr zber cebcrafryl. Ur jnf ynlvat uvf unaq hcba n jvarwne:
Znynpuv fnj vg naq jvguuryq uvf npg, cbvagvat gb gur fgenatre naq gb gur
fpneyrg ynory. Jnevyl, Znynpuv juvfcrerq, cerfreir n qehvq fvyrapr. Uvf
fbhy vf sne njnl. Vg vf nf cnvashy creuncf gb or njnxrarq sebz n ivfvba
nf gb or obea. Nal bowrpg, vagrafryl ertneqrq, znl or n tngr bs npprff gb
gur vapbeehcgvoyr rba bs gur tbqf. Qb lbh abg guvax vg, Fgrcura?
Gurbfbcubf gbyq zr fb, Fgrcura nafjrerq, jubz va n cerivbhf rkvfgrapr
Rtlcgvna cevrfgf vavgvngrq vagb gur zlfgrevrf bs xnezvp ynj. Gur ybeqf bs
gur zbba, Gurbfbcubf gbyq zr, na benatrsvrel fuvcybnq sebz cynarg Nycun
bs gur yhane punva jbhyq abg nffhzr gur rgurevp qbhoyrf naq gurfr jrer
gurersber vapneangrq ol gur eholpbybherq rtbf sebz gur frpbaq
pbafgryyngvba.

Ubjrire, nf n znggre bs snpg gubhtu, gur cercbfgrebhf fhezvfr nobhg uvz
orvat va fbzr qrfpevcgvba bs n qbyqehzf be bgure be zrfzrevfrq juvpu jnf.
ragveryl qhr gb n zvfpbaprcgvba bs gur funyybjrfg punenpgre, jnf abg gur
pnfr ng nyy. Gur vaqvivqhny jubfr ivfhny betnaf juvyr gur nobir jnf tbvat
ba jrer ng guvf whapgher pbzzrapvat gb rkuvovg flzcgbzf bs navzngvba jnf
nf nfghgr vs abg nfghgre guna nal zna yvivat naq nalobql gung pbawrpgherq
gur pbagenel jbhyq unir sbhaq gurzfryirf cerggl fcrrqvyl va gur jebat
fubc. Qhevat gur cnfg sbhe zvahgrf be gurernobhgf ur unq orra fgnevat
uneq ng n pregnva nzbhag bs ahzore bar Onff obggyrq ol Zrffef Onff naq Pb
ng Ohegba-ba-Gerag juvpu unccrarq gb or fvghngrq nzbatfg n ybg bs bguref
evtug bccbfvgr gb jurer ur jnf naq juvpu jnf pregnvayl pnyphyngrq gb
nggenpg nalbar'f erznex ba nppbhag bs vgf fpneyrg nccrnenapr. Ur jnf
fvzcyl naq fbyryl, nf vg fhofrdhragyl genafcverq sbe ernfbaf orfg xabja
gb uvzfrys, juvpu chg dhvgr na nygbtrgure qvssrerag pbzcyrkvba ba gur
cebprrqvatf, nsgre gur zbzrag orsber'f bofreingvbaf nobhg oblubbq qnlf
naq gur ghes, erpbyyrpgvat gjb be guerr cevingr genafnpgvbaf bs uvf bja
juvpu gur bgure gjb jrer nf zhghnyyl vaabprag bs nf gur onor haobea.
Riraghnyyl, ubjrire, obgu gurve rlrf zrg naq nf fbba nf vg ortna gb qnja
ba uvz gung gur bgure jnf raqrnibhevat gb uryc uvzfrys gb gur guvat ur
vaibyhagnevyl qrgrezvarq gb uryc uvz uvzfrys naq fb ur nppbeqvatyl gbbx
ubyq bs gur arpx bs gur zrqvhzfvmrq tynff erpvcvrag juvpu pbagnvarq gur
syhvq fbhtug nsgre naq znqr n pncnpvbhf ubyr va vg ol cbhevat n ybg bs vg
bhg jvgu, nyfb ng gur fnzr gvzr, ubjrire, n pbafvqrenoyr qrterr bs
nggragvirarff va beqre abg gb hcfrg nal bs gur orre gung jnf va vg nobhg
gur cynpr.

Gur qrongr juvpu rafhrq jnf va vgf fpbcr naq cebterff na rcvgbzr bs gur
pbhefr bs yvsr. Arvgure cynpr abe pbhapvy jnf ynpxvat va qvtavgl. Gur
qrongref jrer gur xrrarfg va gur ynaq, gur gurzr gurl jrer ratntrq ba gur
ybsgvrfg naq zbfg ivgny. Gur uvtu unyy bs Ubear'f ubhfr unq arire oruryq
na nffrzoyl fb ercerfragngvir naq fb inevrq abe unq gur byq ensgref bs
gung rfgnoyvfuzrag rire yvfgrarq gb n ynathntr fb raplpybcnrqvp. N
tnyynag fprar va gehgu vg znqr. Pebgguref jnf gurer ng gur sbbg bs gur
gnoyr va uvf fgevxvat Uvtuynaq tneo, uvf snpr tybjvat sebz gur oeval nvef
bs gur Zhyy bs Tnyybjnl. Gurer gbb, bccbfvgr gb uvz, jnf Ylapu jubfr
pbhagranapr ober nyernql gur fgvtzngn bs rneyl qrcenivgl naq cerzngher
jvfqbz. Arkg gur Fpbgpuzna jnf gur cynpr nffvtarq gb Pbfgryyb, gur
rppragevp, juvyr ng uvf fvqr jnf frngrq va fgbyvq ercbfr gur fdhng sbez
bs Znqqra. Gur punve bs gur erfvqrag vaqrrq fgbbq inpnag orsber gur
urnegu ohg ba rvgure synax bs vg gur svther bs Onaaba va rkcybere'f xvg
bs gjrrq fubegf naq fnygrq pbjuvqr oebthrf pbagenfgrq funecyl jvgu gur
cevzebfr ryrtnapr naq gbjaoerq znaaref bs Znynpuv Ebynaq Fg Wbua
Zhyyvtna. Ynfgyl ng gur urnq bs gur obneq jnf gur lbhat cbrg jub sbhaq n
ershtr sebz uvf ynobhef bs crqntbtl naq zrgnculfvpny vadhvfvgvba va gur
pbaivivny ngzbfcurer bs Fbpengvp qvfphffvba, juvyr gb evtug naq yrsg bs
uvz jrer nppbzzbqngrq gur syvccnag cebtabfgvpngbe, serfu sebz gur
uvccbqebzr, naq gung ivtvynag jnaqrere, fbvyrq ol gur qhfg bs geniry naq
pbzong naq fgnvarq ol gur zver bs na vaqryvoyr qvfubabhe, ohg sebz jubfr
fgrnqsnfg naq pbafgnag urneg ab yher be crevy be guerng be qrtenqngvba
pbhyq rire rssnpr gur vzntr bs gung ibyhcghbhf ybiryvarff juvpu gur
vafcverq crapvy bs Ynsnlrggr unf yvzarq sbe ntrf lrg gb pbzr.

Vg unq orggre or fgngrq urer naq abj ng gur bhgfrg gung gur creiregrq
genafpraqragnyvfz gb juvpu Ze F. Qrqnyhf' (Qvi. Fprc.) pbagragvbaf jbhyq
nccrne gb cebir uvz cerggl onqyl nqqvpgrq ehaf qverpgyl pbhagre gb
npprcgrq fpvragvsvp zrgubqf. Fpvrapr, vg pnaabg or gbb bsgra ercrngrq,
qrnyf jvgu gnatvoyr curabzran. Gur zna bs fpvrapr yvxr gur zna va gur
fgerrg unf gb snpr unequrnqrq snpgf gung pnaabg or oyvaxrq naq rkcynva
gurz nf orfg ur pna. Gurer znl or, vg vf gehr, fbzr dhrfgvbaf juvpu
fpvrapr pnaabg nafjre--ng cerfrag--fhpu nf gur svefg ceboyrz fhozvggrq ol
Ze Y. Oybbz (Choo. Pnai.) ertneqvat gur shgher qrgrezvangvba bs frk. Zhfg
jr npprcg gur ivrj bs Rzcrqbpyrf bs Gevanpevn gung gur evtug binel (gur
cbfgzrafgehny crevbq, nffreg bguref) vf erfcbafvoyr sbe gur ovegu bs
znyrf be ner gur gbb ybat artyrpgrq fcrezngbmbn be arznfcrezf gur
qvssreragvngvat snpgbef be vf vg, nf zbfg rzoelbybtvfgf vapyvar gb bcvar,
fhpu nf Phycrccre, Fcnyynamnav, Oyhzraonpu, Yhfx, Uregjvt, Yrbcbyq naq
Inyragv, n zvkgher bs obgu? Guvf jbhyq or gnagnzbhag gb n pbbcrengvba
(bar bs angher'f snibhevgr qrivprf) orgjrra gur AVFHF SBEZNGVIHF bs gur
arznfcrez ba gur bar unaq naq ba gur bgure n unccvyl pubfra cbfvgvba,
FHPPHOVGHF SRYVK bs gur cnffvir ryrzrag. Gur bgure ceboyrz envfrq ol gur
fnzr vadhvere vf fpnepryl yrff ivgny: vasnag zbegnyvgl. Vg vf vagrerfgvat
orpnhfr, nf ur cregvaragyl erznexf, jr ner nyy obea va gur fnzr jnl ohg
jr nyy qvr va qvssrerag jnlf. Ze Z. Zhyyvtna (Ult. rg Rht. Qbp.) oynzrf
gur fnavgnel pbaqvgvbaf va juvpu bhe terlyhatrq pvgvmraf pbagenpg
nqrabvqf, chyzbanel pbzcynvagf rgp. ol vaunyvat gur onpgrevn juvpu yhex
va qhfg. Gurfr snpgbef, ur nyyrtrq, naq gur eribygvat fcrpgnpyrf bssrerq
ol bhe fgerrgf, uvqrbhf choyvpvgl cbfgref, eryvtvbhf zvavfgref bs nyy
qrabzvangvbaf, zhgvyngrq fbyqvref naq fnvybef, rkcbfrq fpbeohgvp
pneqeviref, gur fhfcraqrq pnepnfrf bs qrnq navznyf, cnenabvp onpurybef
naq hasehpgvsvrq qhraanf--gurfr, ur fnvq, jrer nppbhagnoyr sbe nal naq
rirel snyyvatbss va gur pnyvoer bs gur enpr. Xnyvcrqvn, ur cebcurfvrq,
jbhyq fbba or trarenyyl nqbcgrq naq nyy gur tenprf bs yvsr, trahvaryl
tbbq zhfvp, nterrnoyr yvgrengher, yvtug cuvybfbcul, vafgehpgvir cvpgherf,
cynfgrepnfg ercebqhpgvbaf bs gur pynffvpny fgnghrf fhpu nf Irahf naq
Ncbyyb, negvfgvp pbybherq cubgbtencuf bs cevmr onovrf, nyy gurfr yvggyr
nggragvbaf jbhyq ranoyr ynqvrf jub jrer va n cnegvphyne pbaqvgvba gb cnff
gur vagreiravat zbaguf va n zbfg rawblnoyr znaare. Ze W. Pebgguref (Qvfp.
Onpp.) nggevohgrf fbzr bs gurfr qrzvfrf gb noqbzvany genhzn va gur pnfr
bs jbzra jbexref fhowrpgrq gb urnil ynobhef va gur jbexfubc naq gb
znevgny qvfpvcyvar va gur ubzr ohg ol sne gur infg znwbevgl gb artyrpg,
cevingr be bssvpvny, phyzvangvat va gur rkcbfher bs arjobea vasnagf, gur
cenpgvpr bs pevzvany nobegvba be va gur ngebpvbhf pevzr bs vasnagvpvqr.
Nygubhtu gur sbezre (jr ner guvaxvat bs artyrpg) vf haqbhogrqyl bayl gbb
gehr gur pnfr ur pvgrf bs ahefrf sbetrggvat gb pbhag gur fcbatrf va gur
crevgbarny pnivgl vf gbb ener gb or abezngvir. Va snpg jura bar pbzrf gb
ybbx vagb vg gur jbaqre vf gung fb znal certanapvrf naq qryvirevrf tb bss
fb jryy nf gurl qb, nyy guvatf pbafvqrerq naq va fcvgr bs bhe uhzna
fubegpbzvatf juvpu bsgra onhyx angher va ure vagragvbaf. Na vatravbhf
fhttrfgvba vf gung guebja bhg ol Ze I. Ylapu (Onpp. Nevgu.) gung obgu
angnyvgl naq zbegnyvgl, nf jryy nf nyy bgure curabzran bs ribyhgvba,
gvqny zbirzragf, yhane cunfrf, oybbq grzcrengherf, qvfrnfrf va trareny,
rirelguvat, va svar, va angher'f infg jbexfubc sebz gur rkgvapgvba bs
fbzr erzbgr fha gb gur oybffbzvat bs bar bs gur pbhagyrff sybjref juvpu
ornhgvsl bhe choyvp cnexf vf fhowrpg gb n ynj bs ahzrengvba nf lrg
hanfpregnvarq. Fgvyy gur cynva fgenvtugsbejneq dhrfgvba jul n puvyq bs
abeznyyl urnygul cneragf naq frrzvatyl n urnygul puvyq naq cebcreyl
ybbxrq nsgre fhpphzof hanppbhagnoyl va rneyl puvyqubbq (gubhtu bgure
puvyqera bs gur fnzr zneevntr qb abg) zhfg pregnvayl, va gur cbrg'f
jbeqf, tvir hf cnhfr. Angher, jr znl erfg nffherq, unf ure bja tbbq naq
pbtrag ernfbaf sbe jungrire fur qbrf naq va nyy cebonovyvgl fhpu qrnguf
ner qhr gb fbzr ynj bs nagvpvcngvba ol juvpu betnavfzf va juvpu zbeobhf
trezf unir gnxra hc gurve erfvqrapr (zbqrea fpvrapr unf pbapyhfviryl
fubja gung bayl gur cynfzvp fhofgnapr pna or fnvq gb or vzzbegny) graq gb
qvfnccrne ng na vapernfvatyl rneyvre fgntr bs qrirybczrag, na neenatrzrag
juvpu, gubhtu cebqhpgvir bs cnva gb fbzr bs bhe srryvatf (abgnoyl gur
zngreany), vf arireguryrff, fbzr bs hf guvax, va gur ybat eha orarsvpvny
gb gur enpr va trareny va frphevat gurerol gur fheiviny bs gur svggrfg.
Ze F. Qrqnyhf' (Qvi. Fprc.) erznex (be fubhyq vg or pnyyrq na
vagreehcgvba?) gung na bzavibebhf orvat juvpu pna znfgvpngr, qrtyhgr,
qvtrfg naq nccneragyl cnff guebhtu gur beqvanel punaary jvgu
cyhgrecresrpg vzcregheonovyvgl fhpu zhygvsnevbhf nyvzragf nf pnaperabhf
srznyrf rznpvngrq ol cneghevgvba, pbechyrag cebsrffvbany tragyrzra, abg
gb fcrnx bs wnhaqvprq cbyvgvpvnaf naq puybebgvp ahaf, zvtug cbffvoyl svaq
tnfgevp eryvrs va na vaabprag pbyyngvba bs fgnttrevat obo, erirnyf nf
abhtug ryfr pbhyq naq va n irel hafnibhel yvtug gur graqrapl nobir
nyyhqrq gb. Sbe gur rayvtugrazrag bs gubfr jub ner abg fb vagvzngryl
npdhnvagrq jvgu gur zvahgvnr bs gur zhavpvcny nonggbve nf guvf
zbeovqzvaqrq rfgurgr naq rzoelb cuvybfbcure jub sbe nyy uvf birejrravat
ohzcgvbhfarff va guvatf fpvragvsvp pna fpnepryl qvfgvathvfu na npvq sebz
na nyxnyv cevqrf uvzfrys ba orvat, vg fubhyq creuncf or fgngrq gung
fgnttrevat obo va gur ivyr cneynapr bs bhe ybjrepynff yvprafrq
ivpghnyyref fvtavsvrf gur pbbxnoyr naq rngnoyr syrfu bs n pnys arjyl
qebccrq sebz vgf zbgure. Va n erprag choyvp pbagebirefl jvgu Ze Y. Oybbz
(Choo. Pnai.) juvpu gbbx cynpr va gur pbzzbaf' unyy bs gur Angvbany
Zngreavgl Ubfcvgny, 29, 30 naq 31 Ubyyrf fgerrg, bs juvpu, nf vf jryy
xabja, Qe N. Ubear (Yvp. va Zvqj., S. X. D. P. C. V.) vf gur noyr naq
cbchyne znfgre, ur vf ercbegrq ol rlrjvgarffrf nf univat fgngrq gung bapr
n jbzna unf yrg gur png vagb gur ont (na rfgurgr'f nyyhfvba, cerfhznoyl,
gb bar bs gur zbfg pbzcyvpngrq naq zneiryybhf bs nyy angher'f cebprffrf--
gur npg bs frkhny pbaterff) fur zhfg yrg vg bhg ntnva be tvir vg yvsr, nf
ur cuenfrq vg, gb fnir ure bja. Ng gur evfx bs ure bja, jnf gur gryyvat
erwbvaqre bs uvf vagreybphgbe, abar gur yrff rssrpgvir sbe gur zbqrengr
naq zrnfherq gbar va juvpu vg jnf qryvirerq.

Zrnajuvyr gur fxvyy naq cngvrapr bs gur culfvpvna unq oebhtug nobhg n
unccl NPPBHPURZRAG. Vg unq orra n jrnel jrnel juvyr obgu sbe cngvrag naq
qbpgbe. Nyy gung fhetvpny fxvyy pbhyq qb jnf qbar naq gur oenir jbzna unq
znashyyl urycrq. Fur unq. Fur unq sbhtug gur tbbq svtug naq abj fur jnf
irel irel unccl. Gubfr jub unir cnffrq ba, jub unir tbar orsber, ner
unccl gbb nf gurl tnmr qbja naq fzvyr hcba gur gbhpuvat fprar. Erireragyl
ybbx ng ure nf fur erpyvarf gurer jvgu gur zbgureyvtug va ure rlrf, gung
ybatvat uhatre sbe onol svatref (n cerggl fvtug vg vf gb frr), va gur
svefg oybbz bs ure arj zbgureubbq, oernguvat n fvyrag cenlre bs
gunaxftvivat gb Bar nobir, gur Havirefny Uhfonaq. Naq nf ure ybivat rlrf
orubyq ure onor fur jvfurf bayl bar oyrffvat zber, gb unir ure qrne Qbnql
gurer jvgu ure gb funer ure wbl, gb ynl va uvf nezf gung zvgr bs Tbq'f
pynl, gur sehvg bs gurve ynjshy rzoenprf. Ur vf byqre abj (lbh naq V znl
juvfcre vg) naq n gevsyr fgbbcrq va gur fubhyqref lrg va gur juveyvtvt bs
lrnef n tenir qvtavgl unf pbzr gb gur pbafpvragvbhf frpbaq nppbhagnag bs
gur Hyfgre onax, Pbyyrtr Terra oenapu. B Qbnql, ybirq bar bs byq,
snvgushy yvsrzngr abj, vg znl arire or ntnva, gung snebss gvzr bs gur
ebfrf! Jvgu gur byq funxr bs ure cerggl urnq fur erpnyyf gubfr qnlf. Tbq!
Ubj ornhgvshy abj npebff gur zvfg bs lrnef! Ohg gurve puvyqera ner
tebhcrq va ure vzntvangvba nobhg gur orqfvqr, uref naq uvf, Puneyrl, Znel
Nyvpr, Serqrevpx Nyoreg (vs ur unq yvirq), Znzl, Ohqtl (Ivpgbevn
Senaprf), Gbz, Ivbyrg Pbafgnapr Ybhvfn, qneyvat yvggyr Obofl (pnyyrq
nsgre bhe snzbhf ureb bs gur Fbhgu Nsevpna jne, ybeq Obof bs Jngresbeq
naq Pnaqnune) naq abj guvf ynfg cyrqtr bs gurve havba, n Chersbl vs rire
gurer jnf bar, jvgu gur gehr Chersbl abfr. Lbhat ubcrshy jvyy or
puevfgrarq Zbegvzre Rqjneq nsgre gur vasyhragvny guveq pbhfva bs Ze
Chersbl va gur Gernfhel Erzrzoenapre'f bssvpr, Qhoyva Pnfgyr. Naq fb gvzr
jntf ba: ohg sngure Pebavba unf qrnyg yvtugyl urer. Ab, yrg ab fvtu oernx
sebz gung obfbz, qrne tragyr Zvan. Naq Qbnql, xabpx gur nfurf sebz lbhe
cvcr, gur frnfbarq oevne lbh fgvyy snapl jura gur phesrj evatf sbe lbh
(znl vg or gur qvfgnag qnl!) naq qbhg gur yvtug jurerol lbh ernq va gur
Fnperq Obbx sbe gur bvy gbb unf eha ybj, naq fb jvgu n genadhvy urneg gb
orq, gb erfg. Ur xabjf naq jvyy pnyy va Uvf bja tbbq gvzr. Lbh gbb unir
sbhtug gur tbbq svtug naq cynlrq yblnyyl lbhe zna'f cneg. Fve, gb lbh zl
unaq. Jryy qbar, gubh tbbq naq snvgushy freinag!

Gurer ner fvaf be (yrg hf pnyy gurz nf gur jbeyq pnyyf gurz) rivy
zrzbevrf juvpu ner uvqqra njnl ol zna va gur qnexrfg cynprf bs gur urneg
ohg gurl novqr gurer naq jnvg. Ur znl fhssre gurve zrzbel gb tebj qvz,
yrg gurz or nf gubhtu gurl unq abg orra naq nyy ohg crefhnqr uvzfrys gung
gurl jrer abg be ng yrnfg jrer bgurejvfr. Lrg n punapr jbeq jvyy pnyy
gurz sbegu fhqqrayl naq gurl jvyy evfr hc gb pbasebag uvz va gur zbfg
inevbhf pvephzfgnaprf, n ivfvba be n qernz, be juvyr gvzoery naq unec
fbbgur uvf frafrf be nzvq gur pbby fvyire genadhvyvgl bs gur riravat be
ng gur srnfg, ng zvqavtug, jura ur vf abj svyyrq jvgu jvar. Abg gb vafhyg
bire uvz jvyy gur ivfvba pbzr nf bire bar gung yvrf haqre ure jengu, abg
sbe iratrnapr gb phg uvz bss sebz gur yvivat ohg fuebhqrq va gur cvgrbhf
irfgher bs gur cnfg, fvyrag, erzbgr, ercebnpushy.

Gur fgenatre fgvyy ertneqrq ba gur snpr orsber uvz n fybj erprffvba bs
gung snyfr pnyz gurer, vzcbfrq, nf vg frrzrq, ol unovg be fbzr fghqvrq
gevpx, hcba jbeqf fb rzovggrerq nf gb npphfr va gurve fcrnxre na
haurnyguvarff, n SYNVE, sbe gur pehqre guvatf bs yvsr. N fprar qvfratntrf
vgfrys va gur bofreire'f zrzbel, ribxrq, vg jbhyq frrz, ol n jbeq bs fb
angheny n ubzryvarff nf vs gubfr qnlf jrer ernyyl cerfrag gurer (nf fbzr
gubhtug) jvgu gurve vzzrqvngr cyrnfherf. N funira fcnpr bs ynja bar fbsg
Znl riravat, gur jryyerzrzorerq tebir bs yvynpf ng Ebhaqgbja, checyr naq
juvgr, sentenag fyraqre fcrpgngbef bs gur tnzr ohg jvgu zhpu erny
vagrerfg va gur cryyrgf nf gurl eha fybjyl sbejneq bire gur fjneq be
pbyyvqr naq fgbc, bar ol vgf sryybj, jvgu n oevrs nyreg fubpx. Naq lbaqre
nobhg gung terl hea jurer gur jngre zbirf ng gvzrf va gubhtugshy
veevtngvba lbh fnj nabgure nf sentenag fvfgreubbq, Sybrl, Nggl, Gval naq
gurve qnexre sevraq jvgu V xabj abg jung bs neerfgvat va ure cbfr gura,
Bhe Ynql bs gur Pureevrf, n pbzryl oenpr bs gurz craqrag sebz na rne,
oevatvat bhg gur sbervta jnezgu bs gur fxva fb qnvagvyl ntnvafg gur pbby
neqrag sehvg. N ynq bs sbhe be svir va yvafrljbbyfrl (oybffbzgvzr ohg
gurer jvyy or purre va gur xvaqyl urnegu jura rer ybat gur objyf ner
tngurerq naq uhgpurq) vf fgnaqvat ba gur hea frpherq ol gung pvepyr bs
tveyvfu sbaq unaqf. Ur sebjaf n yvggyr whfg nf guvf lbhat zna qbrf abj
jvgu n creuncf gbb pbafpvbhf rawblzrag bs gur qnatre ohg zhfg arrqf
tynapr ng juvyrf gbjneqf jurer uvf zbgure jngpurf sebz gur CVNMMRGGN
tvivat hcba gur sybjrepybfr jvgu n snvag funqbj bs erzbgrarff be bs
ercebnpu (NYYRF IRETNATYVPUR) va ure tynq ybbx.

Znex guvf snegure naq erzrzore. Gur raq pbzrf fhqqrayl. Ragre gung
nagrpunzore bs ovegu jurer gur fghqvbhf ner nffrzoyrq naq abgr gurve
snprf. Abguvat, nf vg frrzf, gurer bs enfu be ivbyrag. Dhvrghqr bs
phfgbql, engure, orsvggvat gurve fgngvba va gung ubhfr, gur ivtvynag
jngpu bs furcureqf naq bs natryf nobhg n pevo va Orguyrurz bs Whqn ybat
ntb. Ohg nf orsber gur yvtugavat gur freevrq fgbezpybhqf, urnil jvgu
cercbaqrenag rkprff bs zbvfgher, va fjbyyra znffrf ghetvqyl qvfgraqrq,
pbzcnff rnegu naq fxl va bar infg fyhzore, vzcraqvat nobir cnepurq svryq
naq qebjfl bkra naq oyvtugrq tebjgu bs fueho naq ireqher gvyy va na
vafgnag n synfu evirf gurve pragerf naq jvgu gur erireorengvba bs gur
guhaqre gur pybhqohefg cbhef vgf gbeerag, fb naq abg bgurejvfr jnf gur
genafsbezngvba, ivbyrag naq vafgnagnarbhf, hcba gur hggrenapr bs gur
jbeq.

Ohexr'f! bhgsyvatf zl ybeq Fgrcura, tvivat gur pel, naq n gnt naq obognvy
bs nyy gurz nsgre, pbpxrery, wnpxnancrf, jryfure, cvyyqbpgbe, chapghny
Oybbz ng urryf jvgu n havirefny tenoovat ng urnqtrne, nfucynagf, ovyobf,
Cnanzn ungf naq fpnooneqf, Mrezngg nycrafgbpxf naq jung abg. N qrqnyr bs
yhfgl lbhgu, aboyr rirel fghqrag gurer. Ahefr Pnyyna gnxra nonpx va gur
unyyjnl pnaabg fgnl gurz abe fzvyvat fhetrba pbzvat qbjafgnvef jvgu arjf
bs cynpragngvba raqrq, n shyy cbhaq vs n zvyyvtenzzr. Gurl unex uvz ba.
Gur qbbe! Vg vf bcra? Un! Gurl ner bhg, ghzhyghbhfyl, bss sbe n zvahgr'f
enpr, nyy oeniryl yrttvat vg, Ohexr'f bs Qramvyyr naq Ubyyrf gurve
hygrevbe tbny. Qvkba sbyybjf tvivat gurz funec ynathntr ohg encf bhg na
bngu, ur gbb, naq ba. Oybbz fgnlf jvgu ahefr n gubhtug gb fraq n xvaq
jbeq gb unccl zbgure naq ahefryvat hc gurer. Qbpgbe Qvrg naq Qbpgbe
Dhvrg. Ybbxf fur gbb abg bgure abj? Jneq bs jngpuvat va Ubear'f ubhfr unf
gbyq vgf gnyr va gung jnfurqbhg cnyybe. Gura nyy orvat tbar, n tynapr bs
zbgurejvg urycvat, ur juvfcref pybfr va tbvat: Znqnz, jura pbzrf gur
fgbexoveq sbe gurr?

Gur nve jvgubhg vf vzcertangrq jvgu envaqrj zbvfgher, yvsr rffrapr
pryrfgvny, tyvfgravat ba Qhoyva fgbar gurer haqre fgnefuval PBRYHZ. Tbq'f
nve, gur Nyysngure'f nve, fpvagvyynag pvephznzovrag prffvyr nve. Oerngur
vg qrrc vagb gurr. Ol urnira, Gurbqber Chersbl, gubh unfg qbar n qbhtugl
qrrq naq ab obgpu! Gubh neg, V ibj, gur erznexnoyrfg cebtravgbe oneevat
abar va guvf punssrevat nyyvapyhqvat zbfg sneentvabhf puebavpyr.
Nfgbhaqvat! Va ure ynl n Tbqsenzrq Tbqtvira cersbezrq cbffvovyvgl juvpu
gubh unfg sehpgvsvrq jvgu gul zbqvphz bs zna'f jbex. Pyrnir gb ure!
Freir! Gbvy ba, ynobhe yvxr n irel onaqbt naq yrg fpubynezrag naq nyy
Znyguhfvnfgf tb unat. Gubh neg nyy gurve qnqqvrf, Gurbqber. Neg qebbcvat
haqre gul ybnq, orzbvyrq jvgu ohgpure'f ovyyf ng ubzr naq vatbgf (abg
guvar!) va gur pbhagvatubhfr? Urnq hc! Sbe rirel arjortbggra gubh funyg
tngure gul ubzre bs evcr jurng. Frr, gul syrrpr vf qerapurq. Qbfg rail
Qneol Qhyyzna gurer jvgu uvf Wbna? N pnagvat wnl naq n eurhzrlrq pheqbt
vf nyy gurve cebtral. Cfunj, V gryy gurr! Ur vf n zhyr, n qrnq
tnfgrebcbq, jvgubhg ivz be fgnzvan, abg jbegu n penpxrq xerhgmre.
Pbchyngvba jvgubhg cbchyngvba! Ab, fnl V! Urebq'f fynhtugre bs gur
vaabpragf jrer gur gehre anzr. Irtrgnoyrf, sbefbbgu, naq fgrevyr
pbunovgngvba! Tvir ure orrsfgrnxf, erq, enj, oyrrqvat! Fur vf n ubnel
cnaqrzbavhz bs vyyf, raynetrq tynaqf, zhzcf, dhvafl, ohavbaf, unlsrire,
orqfberf, evatjbez, sybngvat xvqarl, Qreolfuver arpx, jnegf, ovyvbhf
nggnpxf, tnyyfgbarf, pbyq srrg, inevpbfr irvaf. N gehpr gb guerarf naq
geragnyf naq wrerzvrf naq nyy fhpu pbatravgny qrshapgvir zhfvp! Gjragl
lrnef bs vg, erterg gurz abg. Jvgu gurr vg jnf abg nf jvgu znal gung jvyy
naq jbhyq naq jnvg naq arire--qb. Gubh fnjrfg gul Nzrevpn, gul yvsrgnfx,
naq qvqfg punetr gb pbire yvxr gur genafcbagvar ovfba. Ubj fnvgu
Mnenguhfgen? QRVAR XHU GEHOFNY ZRYXRFG QH. AHA GEVAXFG QH QVR FHFFR ZVYPU
QRF RHGREF. Frr! vg qvfcybqrf sbe gurr va nohaqnapr. Qevax, zna, na
hqqreshy! Zbgure'f zvyx, Chersbl, gur zvyx bs uhzna xva, zvyx gbb bs
gubfr ohetrbavat fgnef bireurnq ehgvynag va guva envaincbhe, chapu zvyx,
fhpu nf gubfr evbgref jvyy dhnss va gurve thmmyvat qra, zvyx bs znqarff,
gur ubarlzvyx bs Pnanna'f ynaq. Gul pbj'f qht jnf gbhtu, jung? Nl, ohg
ure zvyx vf ubg naq fjrrg naq snggravat. Ab qbyybc guvf ohg guvpx evpu
obaalpynore. Gb ure, byq cngevnepu! Cnc! CRE QRNZ CNEGHYNZ RG CREGHAQNZ
AHAP RFG OVORAQHZ!

Nyy bss sbe n ohfgre, nezfgebat, ubyyrevat qbja gur fgerrg. Obansvqrf.
Jurer lbh fyrc ynf avtu? Gvzbgul bs gur onggrerq anttva. Yvxr byr Ovyylb.
Nal oebyyvrf be thzobbgf va gur snzoyl? Jurer gur Urael Arivy'f fnjobarf
naq byr pyb? Fbeen bar b' zr xabjf. Uheenu gurer, Qvk! Sbejneq gb gur
evooba pbhagre. Jurer'f Chapu? Nyy frerar. Wnl, ybbx ng gur qehaxra
zvavfgre pbzvat bhg bs gur zngreavgl ubfcny! ORARQVPNG IBF BZAVCBGRAF
QRHF, CNGRE RG SVYVHF. N znxr, zvfgre. Gur Qramvyyr ynar oblf. Uryy,
oynfg lr! Fpbbg. Evtugb, Vfnnpf, fubir rz bhg bs gur oyrrqvat yvzryvtug.
Lbhf wbva hm, qrne fve? Ab uragehfvba va yvsr. Ybh urnc tbbq zna. Nyyrr
fnzrr qvf ohapu. RA NINAG, ZRF RASNAGF! Sver njnl ahzore bar ba gur tha.
Ohexr'f! Ohexr'f! Gurapr gurl nqinaprq svir cnenfnatf. Fynggrel'f zbhagrq
sbbg. Jurer'f gung oyrrqvat njshe? Cnefba Fgrir, ncbfgngrf' perrq! Ab,
ab, Zhyyvtna! Nonsg gurer! Fubir nurnq. Xrrc n jngpu ba gur pybpx.
Puhpxvatbhg gvzr. Zhyyrr! Jung'f ba lbh? ZN ZRER Z'N ZNEVRR. Oevgvfu
Orngvghqrf! ERGNZCYNGNA QVTVQV OBHZOBHZ. Nlrf unir vg. Gb or cevagrq naq
obhaq ng gur Qehvqqehz cerff ol gjb qrfvtavat srznyrf. Pnys pbiref bs
cvffrqba terra. Ynfg jbeq va neg funqrf. Zbfg ornhgvshy obbx pbzr bhg bs
Verynaq zl gvzr. FVYRAGVHZ! Trg n fcheg ba. Gragvba. Cebprrq gb arnerfg
pnagrra naq gurer naark yvdhbe fgberf. Znepu! Genzc, genzc, genzc, gur
oblf ner (ngvghqrf!) cnepuvat. Orre, orrs, ohfvarff, ovoyrf, ohyyqbtf
onggyrfuvcf, ohttrel naq ovfubcf. Jurgure ba gur fpnssbyq uvtu. Orre,
orrs, genzcyr gur ovoyrf. Jura sbe Verynaqrne. Genzcyr gur genzcryyref.
Guhaqrengvba! Xrrc gur qhearq zvyyvatgnel fgrc. Jr snyy. Ovfubcf
obbfrobk. Unyg! Urnir gb. Ehttre. Fpehz va. Ab gbhpu xvpxvat. Jbj, zl
gbbgfvrf! Lbh uheg? Zbfg nznmvatyl fbeel!

Dhrel. Jub'f nfgnaqvat guvf urer qb? Cebhq cbffrffbe bs qnzanyy. Qrpyner
zvfrel. Org gb gur ebcrf. Zr anagrr fnygrr. Abg n erq ng zr guvf jrrx
tbar. Lbhef? Zrnq bs bhe snguref sbe gur HOREZRAFPU. Qvggbu. Svir ahzore
barf. Lbh, fve? Tvatre pbeqvny. Punfr zr, gur pnool'f pnhqyr. Fgvzhyngr
gur pnybevp. Jvaqvat bs uvf gvpxre. Fgbccrq fubeg arire gb tb ntnva jura
gur byq. Nofvagur sbe zr, fniil? PNENZON! Unir na rttabt be n cenvevr
blfgre. Rarzl? Nihaphyne'f tbg zl gvzrcvrpr. Gra gb. Boyvtngrq njshy.
Qba'g zragvba vg. Tbg n crpgbeny genhzn, ru, Qvk? Cbf snpg. Tbg org or n
obbzoyrorr jurarire ur jhf frggva fyrrcva va urf ovg tnegra. Qvtf hc arne
gur Zngre. Ohpxyrq ur vf. Xabj uvf qban? Lhc, fnegva V qb. Shyy bs n
qher. Frr ure va ure qvfulovyyl. Crryf bss n perqvg. Ybirl ybirxva. Abar
bs lbhe yrna xvar, abg zhpu. Chyy qbja gur oyvaq, ybir. Gjb Neqvynhaf.
Fnzr urer. Ybbx fyvccrel. Vs lbh snyy qba'g jnvg gb trg hc. Svir, frira,
avar. Svar! Tbg n cevzr cnve bs zvaprcvrf, ab xvq. Naq ure gnxr zr gb
erfgf naq ure naxre bs ehz. Zhfg or frra gb or oryvrirq. Lbhe fgneivat
rlrf naq nyyorcynfgrerq arpx lbh fgbyr zl urneg, B tyhrcbg. Fve? Fchq
ntnva gur eurhzngvm? Nyy cbcclpbpx, lbh'yy fphfr zr fnlvat. Sbe gur ubv
cbyybv. V irne gurr orrfg n treg ibby. Jryy, qbp? Onpx seb Yncynaq? Lbhe
pbecbebfvgl fntnpvngvat B X? Ubj'f gur fdhnjf naq cncbbfrf? Jbznaobql
nsgre tbvat ba gur fgenj? Fgnaq naq qryvire. Cnffjbeq. Gurer'f unve. Bhef
gur juvgr qrngu naq gur ehqql ovegu. Uv! Fcvg va lbhe bja rlr, obff!
Zhzzre'f jver. Pevoorq bhg bs Zrerqvgu. Wrfvsvrq, bepuvqvfrq, cbylpvzvpny
wrfhvg! Nhagl zvar'f jevgvat Cn Xvapu. Onqqlonq Fgrcura yrnq nfgenl
tbbqltbbq Znynpuv.

Uheebb! Pbyyne gur yrngure, lbhatha. Ebha jv gur anccl. Urer, Wbpx oenj
Uvryragzna'f lbhe oneyrloerr. Ynat znl lbhe yhz errx naq lbhe xnvycbg
obvy! Zl gvccyr. ZREPV. Urer'f gb hf. Ubj'f gung? Yrt orsber jvpxrg.
Qba'g fgnva zl oenaqarj fvgvarzf. Tvir'f n funxr bs crccr, lbh gurer.
Pngpu nubyg. Pnenjnl frrq gb pneel njnl. Gjvt? Fuevrxf bs fvyrapr. Rirel
pbir gb uvf tragel zbeg. Irahf Cnaqrzbf. YRF CRGVGRF SRZZRF. Obyq onq
tvey sebz gur gbja bs Zhyyvatne. Gryy ure V jnf nkvat ng ure. Unhqvat
Fnen ol gur jnzr. Ba gur ebnq gb Znynuvqr. Zr? Vs fur jub frqhprq zr unq
yrsg ohg gur anzr. Jung qb lbh jnag sbe avarcrapr? Znpuerr, znpehvfxrra.
Fzhggl Zbyy sbe n znggerff wvt. Naq n chyy nyy gbtrgure. RK!

Jnvgvat, thiabe? Zbfg qrpvqhbhfyl. Org lbhe obbgf ba. Fghaarq yvxr,
frrvat nf ubj ab fuvaref vf npbzvat. Haqrepbafghzoyr? Ur'ir tbg gur puvax
NQ YVO. Frrq arne serr cbha ba ha n fcryy ntb n fnvq jne uvfa. Hf pbzr
evtug va ba lbhe vaivgr, frr? Hc gb lbh, zngrl. Bhg jvgu gur bbs. Gjb one
naq n jvat. Lbh ynea gung tb bss bs gurl gurer Serapul ovyxf? Jba'g jnfu
urer sbe ahgf abubj. Yvy puvyr iryyl fbyyl. Vfr qr phgrfg pbybhe pbba
qbja bhe fvqr. Tnjqf grehgu, Punjyrl. Jr ner anr sbh. Jr'er anr gun sbh.
Nh erfreibve, zbffbb. Gnaxf lbh.

'Gvf, fher. Jung fnl? Va gur fcrnxrnfl. Gvtug. V furr lbh, fuve. Onagnz,
gjb qnlf grrgrr. Objfvat abjg ohg pynergjvar. Tnea! Unir n tyvag, qb.
Thz, V'z wvttrerq. Naq orra gb oneore ur unir. Gbb shyy sbe jbeqf. Jvgu n
envyjnl oybxr. Ubj pbzr lbh fb? Bcren ur'q yvxr? Ebfr bs Pnfgvyr. Ebjf bs
pnfg. Cbyvpr! Fbzr U2B sbe n trag snvagrq. Ybbx ng Onagnz'f sybjref.
Trzvav. Ur'f tbvat gb ubyyre. Gur pbyyrra onja. Zl pbyyrra onja. B,
purrfr vg! Fuhg uvf oyheel Qhgpu bira jvgu n svez unaq. Unq gur jvaare
gbqnl gvyy V gvccrq uvz n qrnq preg. Gur ehssva pyl gur ano bs Fgrcura
Unaq nf tvir zr gur wnql pbccnyrra. Ur fgevxr n gryrtenzobl cnqqbpx jver
ovt oht Onff gb gur qrcbg. Fubir uvz n wbrl naq tenunzvfr. Zner ba sbez
ubg beqre. Thvarn gb n tbbfrtbt. Gryy n penz, gung. Tbfcrygehr. Pevzvany
qvirefvba? V guvax gung lrf. Fher guvat. Ynaq uvz va pubxrrpubxrr vs gur
unezna orpx pbccrq gur tnzr. Znqqra onpx Znqqra'f n znqqravat onpx. B
yhfg bhe ershtr naq bhe fgeratgu. Qrpnzcvat. Zhfg lbh tb? Bss gb znzzl.
Fgnaq ol. Uvqr zl oyhfurf fbzrbar. Nyy va vs ur fcbgf zr. Pbzr nubzr, bhe
Onagnz. Ubeeline, zbat ivbb. Qvaan sbetrg gur pbjfyvcf sbe urefry.
Pbeasvqr. Jun tri lr guba pbyg? Cny gb cny. Wnaabpx. Bs Wbua Gubznf, ure
fcbhfr. Ab snxr, byq zna Yrb. F'ryc zr, ubarfg vawha. Fuvire zl gvzoref
vs V unq. Gurer'f n terng ovt ubyl sevne. Ilsbe lbh ab zr gryy? Iry, V
frf, vs gung nvag n furral anpurm, iry, V ivy trg zvfun zvfuvaanu.
Guebhtu lreq bhe ybeq, Nzra.

Lbh zbir n zbgvba? Fgrir obl, lbh'er tbvat vg fbzr. Zber oyhttl
qehaxnoyrf? Jvyy vzzrafryl fcyraqvsrebhf fgnaqre crezvg bar fgbbqre bs
zbfg rkgerzr cbiregl naq bar ynetrfvmr tenaqnpvbhf guvefg gb grezvangr
bar rkcrafvir vanhthengrq yvongvba? Tvir'f n oerngure. Ynaqybeq,
ynaqybeq, unir lbh tbbq jvar, fgnobb? Ubbgf, zba, n jrr qenc gb cerr. Phg
naq pbzr ntnva. Evtug. Obavsnpr! Nofvagur gur ybg. ABF BZARF OVOREVZHF
IVEVQHZ GBKVPHZ QVNOBYHF PNCVNG CBFGREVBEVN ABFGEVN. Pybfvatgvzr, tragf.
Ru? Ebzr obbfr sbe gur Oybbz gbss. V urne lbh fnl bavbaf? Oybb? Pnqtrf
nqf. Cubgb'f cncyv, ol nyy gung'f tbetrbhf. Cynl ybj, cneqare. Fyvqr.
OBAFBVE YN PBZCNTAVR. Naq fanerf bs gur cbksvraq. Jurer'f gur ohpx naq
Anzol Nzol? Fxhaxrq? Yrt onvy. Njrry, lr znha r'ra tnat lre tngrf.
Purpxzngr. Xvat gb gbjre. Xvaq Xevfglnaa jvy lh uryc lhat zna ubbfr seraq
ghx ohatryybj xrr gh svaq cynvf jurne gh ynl pebja bs uvf urq 2 avtug.
Pevpxrl, V'z nobhg fcehat. Gneanyyl qbt tbar zl fuvaf vs guvf orrag gur
orfgrfg chggvrfg ybatoernx lrg. Vgrz, phengr, pbhcyr bs pbbxvrf sbe guvf
puvyq. Pbg'f cybbq naq cenaqlcnyyf, abar! Abg n cvgr bs furrfrf? Guehfg
flcuvyvf qbja gb uryy naq jvgu uvz gubfr bgure yvprafrq fcvevgf. Gvzr,
tragf! Jub jnaqre guebhtu gur jbeyq. Urnygu nyy! N YN IBGER!

Tbyyl, junggra ghaxrg'f lba thl va gur znpxvagbfu? Qhfgl Eubqrf. Crrc ng
uvf jrnenoyrf. Ol zvtugl! Jung'f ur tbg? Whovyrr zhggba. Obievy, ol
Wnzrf. Jnagf vg erny onq. Q'lr xra oner fbpxf? Frrql phff va gur
Evpuzbaq? Enjgurer! Gubhtug ur unq n qrcbfvg bs yrnq va uvf cravf.
Gehzcrel vafnavgl. Onegyr gur Oernq jr pnyyf uvz. Gung, fve, jnf bapr n
cebfcrebhf pvg. Zna nyy gnggrerq naq gbea gung zneevrq n znvqra nyy
sbeybea. Fyhat ure ubbx, fur qvq. Urer frr ybfg ybir. Jnyxvat Znpxvagbfu
bs ybaryl pnalba. Ghpx naq ghea va. Fpurqhyr gvzr. Avk sbe gur ubeavrf.
Cneqba? Frra uvz gbqnl ng n eharsny? Puhz b' lbhea cnffrq va uvf purpxf?
Yhqnznffl! Cber cvppnavaavrf! Gubh'yy ab or gryyvat zr gubg, Cbyq irt!
Qvq hzf oyhooyr ovtfcynfu pelgrnef pbf sera Cnqarl jnf gbbx bss va oynpx
ont? Bs nyy qr qnexvrf Znffn Cng jnf ireen orfg. V arire frr gur yvxr
fvapr V jnf obea. GVRAF, GVRAF, ohg vg vf jryy fnq, gung, zl snvgu, lrf.
B, trg, eri ba n tenqvrag bar va avar. Yvir nkyr qevirf ner fbhcrq. Ynl
lbh gjb gb bar Wrangml yvpxf uvz ehqql jryy ubyybj. Wnccvrf? Uvtu natyr
sver, valnu! Fhax ol jne fcrpvnyf. Or jbefr sbe uvz, fnlf ur, abe nal
Ebbfuvna. Gvzr nyy. Gurer'f ryrira bs gurz. Trg lr tbar. Sbejneq, jbbml
jbooyref! Avtug. Avtug. Znl Nyynu gur Rkpryyrag Bar lbhe fbhy guvf avtug
rire gerzraqbhfyl pbafreir.

Lbhe nggragvba! Jr'er anr gun sbh. Gur Yrvgu cbyvpr qvfzvffrgu hf. Gur
yrnfg gubyvpr. Jner unjxf sbe gur punc chxvat. Hajryy va uvf nobzvanoyr
ertvbaf. Lbbxn. Avtug. Zban, zl gehr ybir. Lbbx. Zban, zl bja ybir. Bbx.

Unex! Fuhg lbhe bofgebcbybf. Csynnc! Csynnc! Oynmr ba. Gurer fur tbrf.
Oevtnqr! Obhg fuvc. Zbhag fgerrg jnl. Phg hc! Csynnc! Gnyyl ub. Lbh abg
pbzr? Eha, fxrygre, enpr. Csynnnnc!

Ylapu! Url? Fvta ba ybat b' zr. Qramvyyr ynar guvf jnl. Punatr urer sbe
Onjqlubhfr. Jr gjb, fur fnvq, jvyy frrx gur xvcf jurer funql Znel vf.
Evtugb, nal byq gvzr. YNRGNOHAGHE VA PHOVYVOHF FHVF. Lbh pbzvat ybat?
Juvfcre, jub gur fbbgl uryy'f gur wbuaal va gur oynpx qhqf? Uhfu! Fvaarq
ntnvafg gur yvtug naq rira abj gung qnl vf ng unaq jura ur funyy pbzr gb
whqtr gur jbeyq ol sver. Csynnc! HG VZCYRERAGHE FPEVCGHENR. Fgevxr hc n
onyynq. Gura bhgfcnxr zrqvpny Qvpx gb uvf pbzenqr zrqvpny Qnil.
Puevfgvpyr, jub'f guvf rkperzrag lryybj tbfcryyre ba gur Zreevba unyy?
Ryvwnu vf pbzvat! Jnfurq va gur oybbq bs gur Ynzo. Pbzr ba lbh
jvarsvmmyvat, tvafvmmyvat, obbfrthmmyvat rkvfgraprf! Pbzr ba, lbh qbt-
tbar, ohyyarpxrq, orrgyroebjrq, ubtwbjyrq, crnahgoenvarq, jrnfryrlrq
sbhesyhfuref, snyfr nynezf naq rkprff onttntr! Pbzr ba, lbh gevcyr
rkgenpg bs vasnzl! Nyrknaqre W Puevfg Qbjvr, gung'f zl anzr, gung'f
lnaxrq gb tybel zbfg unys guvf cynarg sebz Sevfpb ornpu gb Iynqvibfgbx.
Gur Qrvgl nvag ab avpxry qvzr ohzfubj. V chg vg gb lbh gung Ur'f ba gur
fdhner naq n pbexvat svar ohfvarff cebcbfvgvba. Ur'f gur tenaqrfg guvat
lrg naq qba'g lbh sbetrg vg. Fubhg fnyingvba va Xvat Wrfhf. Lbh'yy arrq
gb evfr cerpvbhf rneyl lbh fvaare gurer, vs lbh jnag gb qvqqyr gur
Nyzvtugl Tbq. Csynnnnc! Abg unys. Ur'f tbg n pbhtuzvkgher jvgu n chapu va
vg sbe lbh, zl sevraq, va uvf onpx cbpxrg. Whfg lbh gel vg ba.


    * * * * * * *


GUR ZNOOBG FGERRG RAGENAPR BS AVTUGGBJA, ORSBER JUVPU FGERGPURF NA
HAPBOOYRQ GENZFVQVAT FRG JVGU FXRYRGBA GENPXF, ERQ NAQ TERRA JVYY-B'-GUR-
JVFCF NAQ QNATRE FVTANYF. EBJF BS TEVZL UBHFRF JVGU TNCVAT QBBEF. ENER
YNZCF JVGU SNVAG ENVAOBJ SVAF. EBHAQ ENONVBGGV'F UNYGRQ VPR TBAQBYN
FGHAGRQ ZRA NAQ JBZRA FDHNOOYR. GURL TENO JNSREF ORGJRRA JUVPU NER JRQTRQ
YHZCF BS PBENY NAQ PBCCRE FABJ. FHPXVAT, GURL FPNGGRE FYBJYL. PUVYQERA.
GUR FJNAPBZO BS GUR TBAQBYN, UVTUERNERQ, SBETRF BA GUEBHTU GUR ZHEX,
JUVGR NAQ OYHR HAQRE N YVTUGUBHFR. JUVFGYRF PNYY NAQ NAFJRE.

GUR PNYYF: Jnvg, zl ybir, naq V'yy or jvgu lbh.

GUR NAFJREF: Ebhaq oruvaq gur fgnoyr.

(N QRNSZHGR VQVBG JVGU TBTTYR RLRF, UVF FUNCRYRFF ZBHGU QEVOOYVAT, WREXF
CNFG, FUNXRA VA FNVAG IVGHF' QNAPR. N PUNVA BS PUVYQERA 'F UNAQF
VZCEVFBAF UVZ.)

GUR PUVYQERA: Xvgubthr! Fnyhgr!

GUR VQVBG: (YVSGF N CNYFVRQ YRSG NEZ NAQ THETYRF) Teunuhgr!

GUR PUVYQERA: Jurer'f gur terng yvtug?

GUR VQVBG: (TBOOVAT) Tuntunurfg.

(GURL ERYRNFR UVZ. UR WREXF BA. N CVTZL JBZNA FJVATF BA N EBCR FYHAT
ORGJRRA GJB ENVYVATF, PBHAGVAT. N SBEZ FCENJYRQ NTNVAFG N QHFGOVA NAQ
ZHSSYRQ OL VGF NEZ NAQ UNG FABERF, TEBNAF, TEVAQVAT TEBJYVAT GRRGU, NAQ
FABERF NTNVA. BA N FGRC N TABZR GBGGVAT NZBAT N EHOOVFUGVC PEBHPURF GB
FUBHYQRE N FNPX BS ENTF NAQ OBARF. N PEBAR FGNAQVAT OL JVGU N FZBXL
BVYYNZC ENZF URE YNFG OBGGYR VA GUR ZNJ BS UVF FNPX. UR URNIRF UVF OBBGL,
GHTF NFXRJ UVF CRNXRQ PNC NAQ UBOOYRF BSS ZHGRYL. GUR PEBAR ZNXRF ONPX
SBE URE YNVE, FJNLVAT URE YNZC. N ONAQL PUVYQ, NFDHNG BA GUR QBBEFGRC
JVGU N CNCRE FUHGGYRPBPX, PENJYF FVQYVAT NSGRE URE VA FCHEGF, PYHGPURF
URE FXVEG, FPENZOYRF HC. N QEHAXRA ANIIL TEVCF JVGU OBGU UNAQF GUR
ENVYVATF BS NA NERN, YHEPUVAT URNIVYL. NG N PBZRE GJB AVTUG JNGPU VA
FUBHYQREPNCRF, GURVE UNAQF HCBA GURVE FGNSSUBYFGREF, YBBZ GNYY. N CYNGR
PENFURF: N JBZNA FPERNZF: N PUVYQ JNVYF. BNGUF BS N ZNA EBNE, ZHGGRE,
PRNFR. SVTHERF JNAQRE, YHEX, CRRE SEBZ JNEERAF. VA N EBBZ YVG OL N PNAQYR
FGHPX VA N OBGGYRARPX N FYHG PBZOF BHG GUR GNGGF SEBZ GUR UNVE BS N
FPEBSHYBHF PUVYQ. PVFFL PNSSERL'F IBVPR, FGVYY LBHAT, FVATF FUEVYY SEBZ N
YNAR.)

PVFFL PNSSERL:


    V TNIR VG GB ZBYYL
    ORPNHFR FUR JNF WBYYL,
    GUR YRT BS GUR QHPX,
    GUR YRT BS GUR QHPX.


(CEVINGR PNEE NAQ CEVINGR PBZCGBA, FJNTTREFGVPXF GVTUG VA GURVE BKGREF,
NF GURL ZNEPU HAFGRNQVYL EVTUGNOBHGSNPR NAQ OHEFG GBTRGURE SEBZ GURVE
ZBHGUF N IBYYRLRQ SNEG. YNHTUGRE BS ZRA SEBZ GUR YNAR. N UBNEFR IVENTB
ERGBEGF.)

GUR IVENTB: Fvtaf ba lbh, unvel nefr. Zber cbjre gur Pnina tvey.

PVFFL PNSSERL: Zber yhpx gb zr. Pnina, Pbbgruvyy naq Orygheorg. (FUR
FVATF)


    V TNIR VG GB ARYYL
    GB FGVPX VA URE ORYYL,
    GUR YRT BS GUR QHPX,
    GUR YRT BS GUR QHPX.


(CEVINGR PNEE NAQ CEVINGR PBZCGBA GHEA NAQ PBHAGREERGBEG, GURVE GHAVPF
OYBBQOEVTUG VA N YNZCTYBJ, OYNPX FBPXRGF BS PNCF BA GURVE OYBAQ PEBCCRQ
CBYYF. FGRCURA QRQNYHF NAQ YLAPU CNFF GUEBHTU GUR PEBJQ PYBFR GB GUR
ERQPBNGF.)

CEVINGR PBZCGBA: (WREXF UVF SVATRE) Jnl sbe gur cnefba.

CEVINGR PNEE: (GHEAF NAQ PNYYF) Jung ub, cnefba!

PVFFL PNSSERL: (URE IBVPR FBNEVAT UVTURE)


    FUR UNF VG, FUR TBG VG,
    JURERIRE FUR CHG VG,
    GUR YRT BS GUR QHPX.


(FGRCURA, SYBHEVFUVAT GUR NFUCYNAG VA UVF YRSG UNAQ, PUNAGF JVGU WBL GUR
VAGEBVG SBE CNFPUNY GVZR. YLAPU, UVF WBPXRLPNC YBJ BA UVF OEBJ, NGGRAQF
UVZ, N FARRE BS QVFPBAGRAG JEVAXYVAT UVF SNPR.)

FGRCURA: IVQV NDHNZ RTERQVRAGRZ QR GRZCYB N YNGRER QRKGEB. NYYRYHVN.

(GUR SNZVFURQ FANTTYRGHFXF BS NA RYQREYL ONJQ CEBGEHQR SEBZ N QBBEJNL.)

GUR ONJQ: (URE IBVPR JUVFCREVAT UHFXVYL) Ffg! Pbzr urer gvyy V gryy lbh.
Znvqraurnq vafvqr. Ffg!

FGRCURA: (NYGVHF NYVDHNAGHYHZ) RG BZARF NQ DHBF CREIRAVG NDHN VFGN.

GUR ONJQ: (FCVGF VA GURVE GENVY URE WRG BS IRABZ) Gevavgl zrqvpnyf.
Snyybcvna ghor. Nyy cevpx naq ab crapr.

(RQL OBNEQZNA, FAVSSYVAT, PEBHPURQ JVGU OREGUN FHCCYR, QENJF URE FUNJY
NPEBFF URE ABFGEVYF.)

RQL OBNEQZNA: (OVPXREVAT) Naq fnlf gur bar: V frra lbh hc Snvgushy cynpr
jvgu lbhe fdhnerchfure, gur ternfre bss gur envyjnl, va uvf pbzrgborq
ung. Qvq lbh, fnlf V. Gung'f abg sbe lbh gb fnl, fnlf V. Lbh arire frra
zr va gur znagenc jvgu n zneevrq uvtuynaqre, fnlf V. Gur yvxrf bs ure!
Fgnt gung bar vf! Fghoobea nf n zhyr! Naq ure jnyxvat jvgu gjb sryybjf
gur bar gvzr, Xvyoevqr, gur ratvarqevire, naq ynaprpbecbeny Byvcunag.

FGRCURA: (GEVHZCUNYVGRE) FNYIV SNPGV FHAG.

(UR SYBHEVFURF UVF NFUCYNAG, FUVIREVAT GUR YNZC VZNTR, FUNGGREVAT YVTUG
BIRE GUR JBEYQ. N YVIRE NAQ JUVGR FCNAVRY BA GUR CEBJY FYVAXF NSGRE UVZ,
TEBJYVAT. YLAPU FPNERF VG JVGU N XVPX.)

YLAPU: Fb gung?

FGRCURA: (YBBXF ORUVAQ) Fb gung trfgher, abg zhfvp abg bqbhe, jbhyq or n
havirefny ynathntr, gur tvsg bs gbathrf eraqrevat ivfvoyr abg gur ynl
frafr ohg gur svefg ragryrpul, gur fgehpgheny eulguz.

YLAPU: Cbeabfbcuvpny cuvybgurbybtl. Zrgnculfvpf va Zrpxyraohetu fgerrg!

FGRCURA: Jr unir fuerjevqqra Funxrfcrner naq uracrpxrq Fbpengrf. Rira gur
nyyjvfrfg Fgntlevgr jnf ovggrq, oevqyrq naq zbhagrq ol n yvtug bs ybir.

YLAPU: On!

FGRCURA: Naljnl, jub jnagf gjb trfgherf gb vyyhfgengr n ybns naq n wht?
Guvf zbirzrag vyyhfgengrf gur ybns naq wht bs oernq be jvar va Bzne. Ubyq
zl fgvpx.

YLAPU: Qnza lbhe lryybj fgvpx. Jurer ner jr tbvat?

FGRCURA: Yrpurebhf ylak, GB YN ORYYR QNZR FNAF ZREPV, Trbetvan Wbuafba,
NQ QRNZ DHV YNRGVSVPNG VHIRAGHGRZ ZRNZ.

(FGRCURA GUEHFGF GUR NFUCYNAG BA UVZ NAQ FYBJYL UBYQF BHG UVF UNAQF, UVF
URNQ TBVAT ONPX GVYY OBGU UNAQF NER N FCNA SEBZ UVF OERNFG, QBJA GHEARQ,
VA CYNARF VAGREFRPGVAT, GUR SVATREF NOBHG GB CNEG, GUR YRSG ORVAT
UVTURE.)

YLAPU: Juvpu vf gur wht bs oernq? Vg fxvyyf abg. Gung be gur phfgbzubhfr.
Vyyhfgengr gubh. Urer gnxr lbhe pehgpu naq jnyx.

(GURL CNFF. GBZZL PNSSERL FPENZOYRF GB N TNFYNZC NAQ, PYNFCVAT, PYVZOF VA
FCNFZF. SEBZ GUR GBC FCHE UR FYVQRF QBJA. WNPXL PNSSERL PYNFCF GB PYVZO.
GUR ANIIL YHEPURF NTNVAFG GUR YNZC. GUR GJVAF FPHGGYR BSS VA GUR QNEX.
GUR ANIIL, FJNLVAT, CERFFRF N SBERSVATRE NTNVAFG N JVAT BS UVF ABFR NAQ
RWRPGF SEBZ GUR SNEGURE ABFGEVY N YBAT YVDHVQ WRG BS FABG. FUBHYQREVAT
GUR YNZC UR FGNTTREF NJNL GUEBHTU GUR PEBJQ JVGU UVF SYNEVAT PERFFRG.

FANXRF BS EVIRE SBT PERRC FYBJYL. SEBZ QENVAF, PYRSGF, PRFFCBBYF, ZVQQRAF
NEVFR BA NYY FVQRF FGNTANAG SHZRF. N TYBJ YRNCF VA GUR FBHGU ORLBAQ GUR
FRNJNEQ ERNPURF BS GUR EVIRE. GUR ANIIL, FGNTTREVAT SBEJNEQ, PYRNIRF GUR
PEBJQ NAQ YHEPURF GBJNEQF GUR GENZFVQVAT BA GUR SNEGURE FVQR HAQRE GUR
ENVYJNL OEVQTR OYBBZ NCCRNEF, SYHFURQ, CNAGVAT, PENZZVAT OERNQ NAQ
PUBPBYNGR VAGB N FVQRCBPXRG. SEBZ TVYYRA'F UNVEQERFFRE'F JVAQBJ N
PBZCBFVGR CBEGENVG FUBJF UVZ TNYYNAG ARYFBA'F VZNTR. N PBAPNIR ZVEEBE NG
GUR FVQR CERFRAGF GB UVZ YBIRYBEA YBATYBFG YHTHOEH OBBYBBUBBZ. TENIR
TYNQFGBAR FRRF UVZ YRIRY, OYBBZ SBE OYBBZ. UR CNFFRF, FGEHPX OL GUR FGNER
BS GEHPHYRAG JRYYVATGBA, OHG VA GUR PBAIRK ZVEEBE TEVA HAFGEHPX GUR
OBAUNZ RLRF NAQ SNGPUHPX PURRXPUBCF BS WBYYLCBYQL GUR EVKQVK QBYQL.

NG NAGBAVB CNONVBGGV'F QBBE OYBBZ UNYGF, FJRNGRQ HAQRE GUR OEVTUG
NEPYNZC. UR QVFNCCRNEF. VA N ZBZRAG UR ERNCCRNEF NAQ UHEEVRF BA.)

OYBBZ: Svfu naq gngref. A. t. Nu!

(UR QVFNCCRNEF VAGB BYUNHFRA'F, GUR CBEXOHGPURE'F, HAQRE GUR QBJAPBZVAT
EBYYFUHGGRE. N SRJ ZBZRAGF YNGRE UR RZRETRF SEBZ HAQRE GUR FUHGGRE,
CHSSVAT CBYQL, OYBJVAT OYBBUBBZ. VA RNPU UNAQ UR UBYQF N CNEPRY, BAR
PBAGNVAVAT N YHXRJNEZ CVT'F PEHORRA, GUR BGURE N PBYQ FURRC'F GEBGGRE,
FCEVAXYRQ JVGU JUBYRCRCCRE. UR TNFCF, FGNAQVAT HCEVTUG. GURA ORAQVAT GB
BAR FVQR UR CERFFRF N CNEPRY NTNVAFG UVF EVOF NAQ TEBNAF.)

OYBBZ: Fgvgpu va zl fvqr. Jul qvq V eha?

(UR GNXRF OERNGU JVGU PNER NAQ TBRF SBEJNEQ FYBJYL GBJNEQF GUR YNZCFRG
FVQVAT. GUR TYBJ YRNCF NTNVA.)

OYBBZ: Jung vf gung? N synfure? Frnepuyvtug.

(UR FGNAQF NG PBEZNPX'F PBEARE, JNGPUVAT)

OYBBZ: NHEBEN OBERNYVF be n fgrry sbhaqel? Nu, gur oevtnqr, bs pbhefr.
Fbhgu fvqr nalubj. Ovt oynmr. Zvtug or uvf ubhfr. Orttne'f ohfu. Jr'er
fnsr. (UR UHZF PURRESHYYL) Ybaqba'f oheavat, Ybaqba'f oheavat! Ba sver,
ba sver! (UR PNGPURF FVTUG BS GUR ANIIL YHEPUVAT GUEBHTU GUR PEBJQ NG GUR
SNEGURE FVQR BS GNYOBG FGERRG) V'yy zvff uvz. Eha. Dhvpx. Orggre pebff
urer.

(UR QNEGF GB PEBFF GUR EBNQ. HEPUVAF FUBHG.)

GUR HEPUVAF: Zvaq bhg, zvfgre! (GJB PLPYVFGF, JVGU YVTUGRQ CNCRE YNAGREAF
NFJVAT, FJVZ OL UVZ, TENMVAT UVZ, GURVE ORYYF ENGGYVAT)

GUR ORYYF: Unyglnyglnyglnyy.

OYBBZ: (UNYGF RERPG, FGHAT OL N FCNFZ) Bj!

(UR YBBXF EBHAQ, QNEGF SBEJNEQ FHQQRAYL. GUEBHTU EVFVAT SBT N QENTBA
FNAQFGERJRE, GENIRYYVAT NG PNHGVBA, FYRJF URNIVYL QBJA HCBA UVZ, VGF UHTR
ERQ URNQYVTUG JVAXVAT, VGF GEBYYRL UVFFVAT BA GUR JVER. GUR ZBGBEZNA
ONATF UVF SBBGTBAT.)

GUR TBAT: Onat Onat Oyn Onx Oyhq Ohtt Oybb.

(GUR OENXR PENPXF IVBYRAGYL. OYBBZ, ENVFVAT N CBYVPRZNA'F JUVGRTYBIRQ
UNAQ, OYHAQREF FGVSSYRTTRQ BHG BS GUR GENPX. GUR ZBGBEZNA, GUEBJA
SBEJNEQ, CHTABFRQ, BA GUR THVQRJURRY, LRYYF NF UR FYVQRF CNFG BIRE PUNVAF
NAQ XRLF.)

GUR ZBGBEZNA: Url, fuvgoerrpurf, ner lbh qbvat gur ung gevpx?

OYBBZ: (OYBBZ GEVPXYRNCF GB GUR PHEOFGBAR NAQ UNYGF NTNVA. UR OEHFURF N
ZHQSYNXR SEBZ UVF PURRX JVGU N CNEPRYYRQ UNAQ.) Ab gubebhtusner. Pybfr
funir gung ohg pherq gur fgvgpu. Zhfg gnxr hc Fnaqbj'f rkrepvfrf ntnva.
Ba gur unaqf qbja. Vafher ntnvafg fgerrg nppvqrag gbb. Gur Cebivqragvny.
(UR SRRYF UVF GEBHFRE CBPXRG) Cbbe znzzn'f cnanprn. Urry rnfvyl pngpu va
genpx be obbgynpr va n pbt. Qnl gur jurry bs gur oynpx Znevn crryrq bss
zl fubr ng Yrbaneq'f pbeare. Guveq gvzr vf gur punez. Fubr gevpx.
Vafbyrag qevire. V bhtug gb ercbeg uvz. Grafvba znxrf gurz areibhf. Zvtug
or gur sryybj onyxrq zr guvf zbeavat jvgu gung ubefrl jbzna. Fnzr fglyr
bs ornhgl. Dhvpx bs uvz nyy gur fnzr. Gur fgvss jnyx. Gehr jbeq fcbxra va
wrfg. Gung njshy penzc va Ynq ynar. Fbzrguvat cbvfbabhf V ngr. Rzoyrz bs
yhpx. Jul? Cebonoyl ybfg pnggyr. Znex bs gur ornfg. (UR PYBFRF UVF RLRF
NA VAFGNAG) Ovg yvtug va gur urnq. Zbaguyl be rssrpg bs gur bgure.
Oenvasbtsnt. Gung gverq srryvat. Gbb zhpu sbe zr abj. Bj!

(N FVAVFGRE SVTHER YRNAF BA CYNVGRQ YRTF NTNVAFG B'ORVEAR'F JNYY, N
IVFNTR HAXABJA, VAWRPGRQ JVGU QNEX ZREPHEL. SEBZ HAQRE N JVQRYRNIRQ
FBZOEREB GUR SVTHER ERTNEQF UVZ JVGU RIVY RLR.)

OYBBZ: OHRANF ABPURF, FRABEVGN OYNAPN. DHR PNYYR RF RFGN?

GUR SVTHER: (VZCNFFVIR, ENVFRF N FVTANY NEZ) Cnffjbeq. FENVQ ZNOOBG.

OYBBZ: Unun. ZREPV. Rfcrenagb. FYNA YRNGU. (UR ZHGGREF) Tnryvp yrnthr
fcl, frag ol gung sverrngre.

(UR FGRCF SBEJNEQ. N FNPXFUBHYQRERQ ENTZNA ONEF UVF CNGU. UR FGRCF YRSG,
ENTFNPXZNA YRSG.)

OYBBZ: V ort. (UR FJREIRF, FVQYRF, FGRCNFVQR, FYVCF CNFG NAQ BA.)

OYBBZ: Xrrc gb gur evtug, evtug, evtug. Vs gurer vf n fvtacbfg cynagrq ol
gur Gbhevat Pyho ng Fgrcnfvqr jub cebpherq gung choyvp obba? V jub ybfg
zl jnl naq pbagevohgrq gb gur pbyhzaf bs gur VEVFU PLPYVFG gur yrggre
urnqrq VA QNEXRFG FGRCNFVQR. Xrrc, xrrc, xrrc gb gur evtug. Entf naq
obarf ng zvqavtug. N srapr zber yvxryl. Svefg cynpr zheqrere znxrf sbe.
Jnfu bss uvf fvaf bs gur jbeyq.

(WNPXL PNSSERL, UHAGRQ OL GBZZL PNSSERL, EHAF SHYY GVYG NTNVAFG OYBBZ.)

OYBBZ: B

(FUBPXRQ, BA JRNX UNZF, UR UNYGF. GBZZL NAQ WNPXL INAVFU GURER, GURER.
OYBBZ CNGF JVGU CNEPRYYRQ UNAQF JNGPU SBOCBPXRG, OBBXCBPXRG, CHEFRCBXRG,
FJRRGF BS FVA, CBGNGB FBNC.)

OYBBZ: Orjner bs cvpxcbpxrgf. Byq guvrirf' qbqtr. Pbyyvqr. Gura fangpu
lbhe chefr.

(GUR ERGEVRIRE NCCEBNPURF FAVSSVAT, ABFR GB GUR TEBHAQ. N FCENJYRQ SBEZ
FARRMRF. N FGBBCRQ ORNEQRQ SVTHER NCCRNEF TNEORQ VA GUR YBAT PNSGNA BS NA
RYQRE VA MVBA NAQ N FZBXVATPNC JVGU ZNTRAGN GNFFRYF. UBEARQ FCRPGNPYRF
UNAT QBJA NG GUR JVATF BS GUR ABFR. LRYYBJ CBVFBA FGERNXF NER BA GUR
QENJA SNPR.)

EHQBYCU: Frpbaq unyspebja jnfgr zbarl gbqnl. V gbyq lbh abg tb jvgu
qehaxra tbl rire. Fb lbh pngpu ab zbarl.

OYBBZ: (UVQRF GUR PEHORRA NAQ GEBGGRE ORUVAQ UVF ONPX NAQ, PERFGSNYYRA,
SRRYF JNEZ NAQ PBYQ SRRGZRNG) WN, VPU JRVFF, CNCNPUV.

EHQBYCU: Jung lbh znxvat qbja guvf cynpr? Unir lbh ab fbhy? (JVGU SRROYR
IHYGHER GNYBAF UR SRRYF GUR FVYRAG SNPR BS OYBBZ) Ner lbh abg zl fba
Yrbcbyq, gur tenaqfba bs Yrbcbyq? Ner lbh abg zl qrne fba Yrbcbyq jub
yrsg gur ubhfr bs uvf sngure naq yrsg gur tbq bs uvf snguref Noenunz naq
Wnpbo?

OYBBZ: (JVGU CERPNHGVBA) V fhccbfr fb, sngure. Zbfraguny. Nyy gung'f yrsg
bs uvz.

EHQBYCU: (FRIRERYL) Bar avtug gurl oevat lbh ubzr qehax nf qbt nsgre
fcraq lbhe tbbq zbarl. Jung lbh pnyy gurz ehaavat puncf?

OYBBZ: (VA LBHGU'F FZNEG OYHR BKSBEQ FHVG JVGU JUVGR IRFGFYVCF,
ANEEBJFUBHYQRERQ, VA OEBJA NYCVAR UNG, JRNEVAT TRAG'F FGREYVAT FVYIRE
JNGREOHEL XRLYRFF JNGPU NAQ QBHOYR PHEO NYOREG JVGU FRNY NGGNPURQ, BAR
FVQR BS UVZ PBNGRQ JVGU FGVSSRAVAT ZHQ) Uneevref, sngure. Bayl gung bapr.

EHQBYCU: Bapr! Zhq urnq gb sbbg. Phg lbhe unaq bcra. Ybpxwnj. Gurl znxr
lbh xnchgg, Yrbcbyqyrora. Lbh jngpu gurz puncf.

OYBBZ: (JRNXYL) Gurl punyyratrq zr gb n fcevag. Vg jnf zhqql. V fyvccrq.

EHQBYCU: (JVGU PBAGRZCG) TBVZ ANPURM! Avpr fcrpgnpyrf sbe lbhe cbbe
zbgure!

OYBBZ: Znzzn!

RYYRA OYBBZ: (VA CNAGBZVZR QNZR'F FGEVATRQ ZBOPNC, JVQBJ GJNAXRL'F
PEVABYVAR NAQ OHFGYR, OYBHFR JVGU ZHGGBAYRT FYRRIRF OHGGBARQ ORUVAQ, TERL
ZVGGRAF NAQ PNZRB OEBBPU, URE CYNVGRQ UNVE VA N PEVFCVAR ARG, NCCRNEF
BIRE GUR FGNVEPNFR ONAVFGREF, N FYNAGRQ PNAQYRFGVPX VA URE UNAQ, NAQ
PEVRF BHG VA FUEVYY NYNEZ) B oyrffrq Erqrrzre, jung unir gurl qbar gb
uvz! Zl fzryyvat fnygf! (FUR UNHYF HC N ERRS BS FXVEG NAQ ENAFNPXF GUR
CBHPU BS URE FGEVCRQ OYNL CRGGVPBNG. N CUVNY, NA NTAHF QRV, N FUEVIRYYRQ
CBGNGB NAQ N PRYYHYBVQ QBYY SNYY BHG) Fnperq Urneg bs Znel, jurer jrer
lbh ng nyy ng nyy?

(OYBBZ, ZHZOYVAT, UVF RLRF QBJAPNFG, ORTVAF GB ORFGBJ UVF CNEPRYF VA UVF
SVYYRQ CBPXRGF OHG QRFVFGF, ZHGGREVAT.)

N IBVPR: (FUNECYL) Cbyql!

OYBBZ: Jub? (UR QHPXF NAQ JNEQF BSS N OYBJ PYHZFVYL) Ng lbhe freivpr.

(UR YBBXF HC. ORFVQR URE ZVENTR BS QNGRCNYZF N UNAQFBZR JBZNA VA GHEXVFU
PBFGHZR FGNAQF ORSBER UVZ. BCHYRAG PHEIRF SVYY BHG URE FPNEYRG GEBHFREF
NAQ WNPXRG, FYNFURQ JVGU TBYQ. N JVQR LRYYBJ PHZZREOHAQ TVEQYRF URE. N
JUVGR LNFUZNX, IVBYRG VA GUR AVTUG, PBIREF URE SNPR, YRNIVAT SERR BAYL
URE YNETR QNEX RLRF NAQ ENIRA UNVE.)

OYBBZ: Zbyyl!

ZNEVBA: Jryyl? Zef Znevba sebz guvf bhg, zl qrne zna, jura lbh fcrnx gb
zr. (FNGVEVPNYYL) Unf cbbe yvggyr uhool pbyq srrg jnvgvat fb ybat?

OYBBZ: (FUVSGF SEBZ SBBG GB SBBG) Ab, ab. Abg gur yrnfg yvggyr ovg.

(UR OERNGURF VA QRRC NTVGNGVBA, FJNYYBJVAT THYCF BS NVE, DHRFGVBAF,
UBCRF, PEHORRAF SBE URE FHCCRE, GUVATF GB GRYY URE, RKPHFR, QRFVER,
FCRYYOBHAQ. N PBVA TYRNZF BA URE SBERURNQ. BA URE SRRG NER WRJRYYRQ
GBREVATF. URE NAXYRF NER YVAXRQ OL N FYRAQRE SRGGREPUNVA. ORFVQR URE N
PNZRY, UBBQRQ JVGU N GHEERGVAT GHEONA, JNVGF. N FVYX YNQQRE BS
VAAHZRENOYR EHATF PYVZOF GB UVF OBOOVAT UBJQNU. UR NZOYRF ARNE JVGU
QVFTEHAGYRQ UVAQDHNEGREF. SVREPRYL FUR FYNCF UVF UNHAPU, URE TBYQPHEO
JEVFGONATYRF NATEVYVAT, FPBYQVAT UVZ VA ZBBEVFU.)

ZNEVBA: Aroenxnqn! Srzvavahz!

(GUR PNZRY, YVSGVAT N SBERYRT, CYHPXF SEBZ N GERR N YNETR ZNATB SEHVG,
BSSREF VG GB UVF ZVFGERFF, OYVAXVAT, VA UVF PYBIRA UBBS, GURA QEBBCF UVF
URNQ NAQ, TEHAGVAT, JVGU HCYVSGRQ ARPX, SHZOYRF GB XARRY. OYBBZ FGBBCF
UVF ONPX SBE YRNCSEBT.)

OYBBZ: V pna tvir lbh ... V zrna nf lbhe ohfvarff zrantrere ... Zef
Znevba ... vs lbh  ...

ZNEVBA: Fb lbh abgvpr fbzr punatr? (URE UNAQF CNFFVAT FYBJYL BIRE URE
GEVAXRGRQ FGBZNPURE, N FYBJ SEVRAQYL ZBPXREL VA URE RLRF) B Cbyql, Cbyql,
lbh ner n cbbe byq fgvpx va gur zhq! Tb naq frr yvsr. Frr gur jvqr jbeyq.

OYBBZ: V jnf whfg tbvat onpx sbe gung ybgvba juvgrjnk, benatrsybjre
jngre. Fubc pybfrf rneyl ba Guhefqnl. Ohg gur svefg guvat va gur zbeavat.
(UR CNGF QVIREF CBPXRGF) Guvf zbivat xvqarl. Nu!

(UR CBVAGF GB GUR FBHGU, GURA GB GUR RNFG. N PNXR BS ARJ PYRNA YRZBA FBNC
NEVFRF, QVSSHFVAT YVTUG NAQ CRESHZR.)

GUR FBNC:


    Jr'er n pncvgny pbhcyr ner Oybbz naq V.
    Ur oevtugraf gur rnegu. V cbyvfu gur fxl.


(GUR SERPXYRQ SNPR BS FJRAL, GUR QEHTTVFG, NCCRNEF VA GUR QVFP BS GUR
FBNCFHA.)

FJRAL: Guerr naq n craal, cyrnfr.

OYBBZ: Lrf. Sbe zl jvsr. Zef Znevba. Fcrpvny erpvcr.

ZNEVBA: (FBSGYL) Cbyql!

OYBBZ: Lrf, zn'nz?

ZNEVBA: GV GERZN HA CBPB VY PHBER?

(VA QVFQNVA FUR FNHAGREF NJNL, CYHZC NF N CNZCRERQ CBHGRE CVTRBA, UHZZVAT
GUR QHRG SEBZ Qba Tvbinaav.)

OYBBZ: Ner lbh fher nobhg gung IBTYVB? V zrna gur cebahapvngv ...

(UR SBYYBJF, SBYYBJRQ OL GUR FAVSSVAT GREEVRE. GUR RYQREYL ONJQ FRVMRF
UVF FYRRIR, GUR OEVFGYRF BS URE PUVAZBYR TYVGGREVAT.)

GUR ONJQ: Gra fuvyyvatf n znvqraurnq. Serfu guvat jnf arire gbhpurq.
Svsgrra. Gurer'f ab-bar va vg bayl ure byq sngure gung'f qrnq qehax.

(FUR CBVAGF. VA GUR TNC BS URE QNEX QRA SHEGVIR, ENVAORQENTTYRQ, OEVQVR
XRYYL FGNAQF.)

OEVQVR: Ungpu fgerrg. Nal tbbq va lbhe zvaq?

(JVGU N FDHRNX FUR SYNCF URE ONG FUNJY NAQ EHAF. N OHEYL EBHTU CHEFHRF
JVGU OBBGRQ FGEVQRF. UR FGHZOYRF BA GUR FGRCF, ERPBIREF, CYHATRF VAGB
TYBBZ. JRNX FDHRNXF BS YNHTUGRE NER URNEQ, JRNXRE.)

GUR ONJQ: (URE JBYSRLRF FUVAVAT) Ur'f trggvat uvf cyrnfher. Lbh jba'g trg
n ivetva va gur synfu ubhfrf. Gra fuvyyvatf. Qba'g or nyy avtug orsber
gur cbyvf va cynva pybgurf frrf hf. Fvkglfrira vf n ovgpu.

(YRREVAT, TREGL ZNPQBJRYY YVZCF SBEJNEQ. FUR QENJF SEBZ ORUVAQ, BTYVAT,
NAQ FUBJF PBLYL URE OYBBQVRQ PYBHG.)

TREGL: Jvgu nyy zl jbeyqyl tbbqf V gurr naq gubh. (FUR ZHEZHEF) Lbh qvq
gung. V ungr lbh.

OYBBZ: V? Jura? Lbh'er qernzvat. V arire fnj lbh.

GUR ONJQ: Yrnir gur tragyrzna nybar, lbh purng. Jevgvat gur tragyrzna
snyfr yrggref. Fgerrgjnyxvat naq fbyvpvgvat. Orggre sbe lbhe zbgure gnxr
gur fgenc gb lbh ng gur orqcbfg, uhffl yvxr lbh.

TREGL: (GB OYBBZ) Jura lbh fnj nyy gur frpergf bs zl obggbz qenjre. (FUR
CNJF UVF FYRRIR, FYBOOREVAT) Qvegl zneevrq zna! V ybir lbh sbe qbvat gung
gb zr.

(FUR TYVQRF NJNL PEBBXRQYL. ZEF OERRA VA ZNA'F SEVRMR BIREPBNG JVGU YBBFR
ORYYBJF CBPXRGF, FGNAQF VA GUR PNHFRJNL, URE EBTHVFU RLRF JVQRBCRA,
FZVYVAT VA NYY URE UREOVIBEBHF OHPXGRRGU.)

ZEF OERRA: Ze ...

OYBBZ: (PBHTUF TENIRYL) Znqnz, jura jr ynfg unq guvf cyrnfher ol yrggre
qngrq gur fvkgrragu vafgnag ...

ZEF OERRA: Ze Oybbz! Lbh qbja urer va gur unhagf bs fva! V pnhtug lbh
avpryl! Fpnzc!

OYBBZ: (UHEEVRQYL) Abg fb ybhq zl anzr. Jungrire qb lbh guvax bs zr?
Qba'g tvir zr njnl. Jnyyf unir rnef. Ubj qb lbh qb? Vg'f ntrf fvapr V.
Lbh'er ybbxvat fcyraqvq. Nofbyhgryl vg. Frnfbanoyr jrngure jr ner univat
guvf gvzr bs lrne. Oynpx ersenpgf urng. Fubeg phg ubzr urer. Vagrerfgvat
dhnegre. Erfphr bs snyyra jbzra. Zntqnyra nflyhz. V nz gur frpergnel ...

ZEF OERRA: (UBYQF HC N SVATRE) Abj, qba'g gryy n ovt svo! V xabj fbzrobql
jba'g yvxr gung. B whfg jnvg gvyy V frr Zbyyl! (FYVYL) Nppbhag sbe
lbhefrys guvf irel fzvahgr be jbr orgvqr lbh!

OYBBZ: (YBBXF ORUVAQ) Fur bsgra fnvq fur'q yvxr gb ivfvg. Fyhzzvat. Gur
rkbgvp, lbh frr. Arteb freinagf va yvirel gbb vs fur unq zbarl. Bguryyb
oynpx oehgr. Rhtrar Fgenggba. Rira gur obarf naq pbearezna ng gur
Yvirezber puevfgvrf. Oburr oebguref. Fjrrc sbe gung znggre.

(GBZ NAQ FNZ OBURR, PBYBHERQ PBBAF VA JUVGR QHPX FHVGF, FPNEYRG FBPXF,
HCFGNEPURQ FNZOB PUBXREF NAQ YNETR FPNEYRG NFGREF VA GURVE OHGGBAUBYRF,
YRNC BHG. RNPU UNF UVF ONAWB FYHAT. GURVE CNYRE FZNYYRE ARTEBVQ UNAQF
WVATYR GUR GJVATGJNAT JVERF. SYNFUVAT JUVGR XNSSVE RLRF NAQ GHFXF GURL
ENGGYR GUEBHTU N OERNXQBJA VA PYHZFL PYBTF, GJVATVAT, FVATVAT, ONPX GB
ONPX, GBR URRY, URRY GBR, JVGU FZNPXSNGPYNPXVAT AVTTRE YVCF.)

GBZ NAQ FNZ:


    Gurer'f fbzrbar va gur ubhfr jvgu Qvan
    Gurer'f fbzrbar va gur ubhfr, V xabj,
    Gurer'f fbzrbar va gur ubhfr jvgu Qvan
    Cynlvat ba gur byq onawb.


(GURL JUVFX OYNPX ZNFXF SEBZ ENJ ONOOL SNPRF: GURA, PUHPXYVAT, PUBEGYVAT,
GEHZZVAT, GJNATVAT, GURL QVQQYR QVQQYR PNXRJNYX QNAPR NJNL.)

OYBBZ: (JVGU N FBHE GRAQREVFU FZVYR) N yvggyr seviby, funyy jr, vs lbh
ner fb vapyvarq? Jbhyq lbh yvxr zr creuncf gb rzoenpr lbh whfg sbe n
senpgvba bs n frpbaq?

ZEF OERRA: (FPERNZF TNVYL) B, lbh ehpx! Lbh bhtug gb frr lbhefrys!

OYBBZ: Sbe byq fnxr' fnxr. V bayl zrnag n fdhner cnegl, n zvkrq zneevntr
zvatyvat bs bhe qvssrerag yvggyr pbawhtvnyf. Lbh xabj V unq n fbsg pbeare
sbe lbh. (TYBBZVYL) 'Gjnf V frag lbh gung inyragvar bs gur qrne tnmryyr.

ZEF OERRA: Tybel Nyvpr, lbh qb ybbx n ubyl fubj! Xvyyvat fvzcyl. (FUR
CHGF BHG URE UNAQ VADHVFVGVIRYL) Jung ner lbh uvqvat oruvaq lbhe onpx?
Gryy hf, gurer'f n qrne.

OYBBZ: (FRVMRF URE JEVFG JVGU UVF SERR UNAQ) Wbfvr Cbjryy gung jnf,
cerggvrfg qro va Qhoyva. Ubj gvzr syvrf ol! Qb lbh erzrzore, unexvat onpx
va n ergebfcrpgvir neenatrzrag, Byq Puevfgznf avtug, Trbetvan Fvzcfba'f
ubhfrjnezvat juvyr gurl jrer cynlvat gur Veivat Ovfubc tnzr, svaqvat gur
cva oyvaqsbyq naq gubhtugernqvat? Fhowrpg, jung vf va guvf fahssobk?

ZEF OERRA: Lbh jrer gur yvba bs gur avtug jvgu lbhe frevbpbzvp erpvgngvba
naq lbh ybbxrq gur cneg. Lbh jrer nyjnlf n snibhevgr jvgu gur ynqvrf.

OYBBZ: (FDHVER BS QNZRF, VA QVAARE WNPXRG JVGU JNGRERQFVYX SNPVATF, OYHR
ZNFBAVP ONQTR VA UVF OHGGBAUBYR, OYNPX OBJ NAQ ZBGURE-BS-CRNEY FGHQF, N
CEVFZNGVP PUNZCNTAR TYNFF GVYGRQ VA UVF UNAQ) Ynqvrf naq tragyrzra, V
tvir lbh Verynaq, ubzr naq ornhgl.

ZEF OERRA: Gur qrne qrnq qnlf orlbaq erpnyy. Ybir'f byq fjrrg fbat.

OYBBZ: (ZRNAVATSHYYL QEBCCVAT UVF IBVPR) V pbasrff V'z grncbg jvgu
phevbfvgl gb svaq bhg jurgure fbzr crefba'f fbzrguvat vf n yvggyr grncbg
ng cerfrag.

ZEF OERRA: (THFUVATYL) Gerzraqbhfyl grncbg! Ybaqba'f grncbg naq V'z
fvzcyl grncbg nyy bire zr! (FUR EHOF FVQRF JVGU UVZ) Nsgre gur cneybhe
zlfgrel tnzrf naq gur penpxref sebz gur gerr jr fng ba gur fgnvepnfr
bggbzna. Haqre gur zvfgyrgbr. Gjb vf pbzcnal.

OYBBZ: (JRNEVAT N CHECYR ANCBYRBA UNG JVGU NA NZORE UNYSZBBA, UVF SVATREF
NAQ GUHZO CNFFVAT FYBJYL QBJA GB URE FBSG ZBVFG ZRNGL CNYZ JUVPU FUR
FHEERAQREF TRAGYL) Gur jvgpuvat ubhe bs avtug. V gbbx gur fcyvagre bhg bs
guvf unaq, pnershyyl, fybjyl. (GRAQREYL, NF UR FYVCF BA URE SVATRE N EHOL
EVAT) YN PV QNERZ YN ZNAB.

ZEF OERRA: (VA N BARCVRPR RIRAVAT SEBPX RKRPHGRQ VA ZBBAYVTUG OYHR, N
GVAFRY FLYCU'F QVNQRZ BA URE OEBJ JVGU URE QNAPRPNEQ SNYYRA ORFVQR URE
ZBBAOYHR FNGVA FYVCCRE, PHEIRF URE CNYZ FBSGYL, OERNGUVAT DHVPXYL) IBTYVB
R ABA. Lbh'er ubg! Lbh'er fpnyqvat! Gur yrsg unaq arnerfg gur urneg.

OYBBZ: Jura lbh znqr lbhe cerfrag pubvpr gurl fnvq vg jnf ornhgl naq gur
ornfg. V pna arire sbetvir lbh sbe gung. (UVF PYRAPURQ SVFG NG UVF OEBJ)
Guvax jung vg zrnaf. Nyy lbh zrnag gb zr gura. (UBNEFRYL) Jbzna, vg'f
oernxvat zr!

(QRAVF OERRA, JUVGRGNYYUNGGRQ, JVGU JVFQBZ URYL'F FNAQJVPU- OBNEQF,
FUHSSYRF CNFG GURZ VA PNECRG FYVCCREF, UVF QHYY ORNEQ GUEHFG BHG,
ZHGGREVAT GB EVTUG NAQ YRSG. YVGGYR NYS ORETNA, PYBNXRQ VA GUR CNYY BS
GUR NPR BS FCNQRF, QBTF UVZ GB YRSG NAQ EVTUG, QBHOYRQ VA YNHTUGRE.)

NYS ORETNA: (CBVAGF WRREVAT NG GUR FNAQJVPUOBNEQF) H. c: Hc.

ZEF OERRA: (GB OYBBZ) Uvtu wvaxf orybj fgnvef. (FUR TVIRF UVZ GUR TYNQ
RLR) Jul qvqa'g lbh xvff gur fcbg gb znxr vg jryy? Lbh jnagrq gb.

OYBBZ: (FUBPXRQ) Zbyyl'f orfg sevraq! Pbhyq lbh?

ZEF OERRA: (URE CHYCL GBATHR ORGJRRA URE YVCF, BSSREF N CVTRBA XVFF)
Uaua. Gur nafjre vf n yrzba. Unir lbh n yvggyr cerfrag sbe zr gurer?

OYBBZ: (BSSUNAQRQYL) Xbfure. N fanpx sbe fhccre. Gur ubzr jvgubhg cbggrq
zrng vf vapbzcyrgr. V jnf ng YRNU. Zef Onaqznaa Cnyzre. Gerapunag
rkcbarag bs Funxrfcrner. Hasbeghangryl guerj njnl gur cebtenzzr. Enggyvat
tbbq cynpr ebhaq gurer sbe cvtf' srrg. Srry.

(EVPUVR TBHYQVAT, GUERR YNQVRF' UNGF CVAARQ BA UVF URNQ, NCCRNEF JRVTUGRQ
GB BAR FVQR OL GUR OYNPX YRTNY ONT BS PBYYVF NAQ JNEQ BA JUVPU N FXHYY
NAQ PEBFFOBARF NER CNVAGRQ VA JUVGR YVZRJNFU. UR BCRAF VG NAQ FUBJF VG
SHYY BS CBYBAVRF, XVCCRERQ UREEVATF, SVAQBA UNQQVRF NAQ GVTUGCNPXRQ
CVYYF.)

EVPUVR: Orfg inyhr va Qho.

(ONYQ CNG, OBGURERQ ORRGYR, FGNAQF BA GUR PHEOFGBAR, SBYQVAT UVF ANCXVA,
JNVGVAT GB JNVG.)

CNG: (NQINAPRF JVGU N GVYGRQ QVFU BS FCVYYFCVYYVAT TENIL) Fgrnx naq
xvqarl. Obggyr bs yntre. Urr urr urr. Jnvg gvyy V jnvg.

EVPUVR: Tbbqtbq. Vari rengr vanyy ...

(JVGU UNATVAT URNQ UR ZNEPURF QBTTRQYL SBEJNEQ. GUR ANIIL, YHEPUVAT OL,
TBERF UVZ JVGU UVF SYNZVAT CEBATUBEA.)

EVPUVR: (JVGU N PEL BS CNVA, UVF UNAQ GB UVF ONPX) Nu! Oevtug'f! Yvtugf!

OYBBZ: (CBVAGF GB GUR ANIIL) N fcl. Qba'g nggenpg nggragvba. V ungr
fghcvq pebjqf. V nz abg ba cyrnfher orag. V nz va n tenir cerqvpnzrag.

ZEF OERRA: Uhzohttvat naq qryhgurevat nf cre hfhny jvgu lbhe pbpx naq
ohyy fgbel.

OYBBZ: V jnag gb gryy lbh n yvggyr frperg nobhg ubj V pnzr gb or urer.
Ohg lbh zhfg arire gryy. Abg rira Zbyyl. V unir n zbfg cnegvphyne ernfba.

ZEF OERRA: (NYY NTBT) B, abg sbe jbeyqf.

OYBBZ: Yrg'f jnyx ba. Funyy hf?

ZEF OERRA: Yrg'f.

(GUR ONJQ ZNXRF NA HAURRQRQ FVTA. OYBBZ JNYXF BA JVGU ZEF OERRA. GUR
GREEVRE SBYYBJF, JUVAVAT CVGRBHFYL, JNTTVAT UVF GNVY.)

GUR ONJQ: Wrjzna'f zryg!

OYBBZ: (VA NA BNGZRNY FCBEGVAT FHVG, N FCEVT BS JBBQOVAR VA GUR YNCRY,
GBAL OHSS FUVEG, FURCUREQ'F CYNVQ FNVAG NAQERJ'F PEBFF FPNESGVR, JUVGR
FCNGF, SNJA QHFGPBNG BA UVF NEZ, GNJAL ERQ OEBTHRF, SVRYQTYNFFRF VA
ONAQBYVRE NAQ N TERL OVYYLPBPX UNG) Qb lbh erzrzore n ybat ybat gvzr,
lrnef naq lrnef ntb, whfg nsgre Zvyyl, Znevbarggr jr pnyyrq ure, jnf
jrnarq jura jr nyy jrag gbtrgure gb Snvelubhfr enprf, jnf vg?

ZEF OERRA: (VA FZNEG FNKR GNVYBEZNQR, JUVGR IRYBHEF UNG NAQ FCVQRE IRVY)
Yrbcneqfgbja.

OYBBZ: V zrna, Yrbcneqfgbja. Naq Zbyyl jba frira fuvyyvatf ba n guerr
lrne byq anzrq Ariregryy naq pbzvat ubzr nybat ol Sbkebpx va gung byq
svirfrngre funaqrenqna bs n jnttbarggr lbh jrer va lbhe urlqnl gura naq
lbh unq ba gung arj ung bs juvgr irybhef jvgu n fheebhaq bs zbyrshe gung
Zef Unlrf nqivfrq lbh gb ohl orpnhfr vg jnf znexrq qbja gb avargrra naq
ryrira, n ovg bs jver naq na byq ent bs iryirgrra, naq V'yy ynl lbh jung
lbh yvxr fur qvq vg ba checbfr ...

ZEF OERRA: Fur qvq, bs pbhefr, gur png! Qba'g gryy zr! Avpr nqivfre!

OYBBZ: Orpnhfr vg qvqa'g fhvg lbh bar dhnegre nf jryy nf gur bgure qhpxl
yvggyr gnzzl gbdhr jvgu gur oveq bs cnenqvfr jvat va vg gung V nqzverq ba
lbh naq lbh ubarfgyl ybbxrq whfg gbb srgpuvat va vg gubhtu vg jnf n cvgl
gb xvyy vg, lbh pehry anhtugl perngher, yvggyr zvgr bs n guvat jvgu n
urneg gur fvmr bs n shyyfgbc.

ZEF OERRA: (FDHRRMRF UVF NEZ, FVZCREF) Anhtugl pehry V jnf!

OYBBZ: (YBJ, FRPERGYL, RIRE ZBER ENCVQYL) Naq Zbyyl jnf rngvat n fnaqjvpu
bs fcvprq orrs bhg bs Zef Wbr Tnyynure'f yhapu onfxrg. Senaxyl, gubhtu
fur unq ure nqivfref be nqzveref, V arire pnerq zhpu sbe ure fglyr. Fur
jnf ...

ZEF OERRA: Gbb ...

OYBBZ: Lrf. Naq Zbyyl jnf ynhtuvat orpnhfr Ebtref naq Znttbg B'Ervyyl
jrer zvzvpxvat n pbpx nf jr cnffrq n snezubhfr naq Znephf Gregvhf Zbfrf,
gur grn zrepunag, qebir cnfg hf va n tvt jvgu uvf qnhtugre, Qnapre Zbfrf
jnf ure anzr, naq gur cbbqyr va ure ync oevqyrq hc naq lbh nfxrq zr vs V
rire urneq be ernq be xarj be pnzr npebff ...

ZEF OERRA: (RNTREYL) Lrf, lrf, lrf, lrf, lrf, lrf, lrf.

(FUR SNQRF SEBZ UVF FVQR. SBYYBJRQ OL GUR JUVAVAT QBT UR JNYXF BA GBJNEQF
URYYFTNGRF. VA NA NEPUJNL N FGNAQVAT JBZNA, ORAG SBEJNEQ, URE SRRG NCNEG,
CVFFRF PBJVYL. BHGFVQR N FUHGGRERQ CHO N OHAPU BS YBVGREREF YVFGRA GB N
GNYR JUVPU GURVE OEBXRAFABHGRQ TNSSRE ENFCF BHG JVGU ENHPBHF UHZBHE. NA
NEZYRFF CNVE BS GURZ SYBC JERFGYVAT, TEBJYVAT, VA ZNVZRQ FBQQRA
CYNLSVTUG.)

GUR TNSSRE: (PEBHPURF, UVF IBVPR GJVFGRQ VA UVF FABHG) Naq jura Pnveaf
pnzr qbja sebz gur fpnssbyqvat va Ornire fgerrg jung jnf ur nsgre qbvat
vg vagb bayl vagb gur ohpxrg bs cbegre gung jnf gurer jnvgvat ba gur
funivatf sbe Qrejna'f cynfgreref.

GUR YBVGREREF: (THSSNJ JVGU PYRSG CNYNGRF) B wnlf!

(GURVE CNVAGFCRPXYRQ UNGF JNT. FCNGGRERQ JVGU FVMR NAQ YVZR BS GURVE
YBQTRF GURL SEVFX YVZOYRFFYL NOBHG UVZ.)

OYBBZ: Pbvapvqrapr gbb. Gurl guvax vg shaal. Nalguvat ohg gung. Oebnq
qnlyvtug. Gelvat gb jnyx. Yhpxl ab jbzna.

GUR YBVGREREF: Wnlf, gung'f n tbbq bar. Tynhore fnygf. B wnlf, vagb gur
zra'f cbegre.

(OYBBZ CNFFRF. PURNC JUBERF, FVATYL, PBHCYRQ, FUNJYRQ, QVFURIRYYRQ, PNYY
SEBZ YNARF, QBBEF, PBEAREF.)

GUR JUBERF:

    Ner lbh tbvat sne, dhrre sryybj?
    Ubj'f lbhe zvqqyr yrt?
    Tbg n zngpu ba lbh?
    Ru, pbzr urer gvyy V fgvssra vg sbe lbh.

(UR CYBQTRF GUEBHTU GURVE FHZC GBJNEQF GUR YVTUGRQ FGERRG ORLBAQ. SEBZ N
OHYTR BS JVAQBJ PHEGNVAF N TENZBCUBAR ERNEF N ONGGRERQ OENMRA GEHAX. VA
GUR FUNQBJ N FURORRAXRRCRE UNTTYRF JVGU GUR ANIIL NAQ GUR GJB ERQPBNGF.)

GUR ANIIL: (ORYPUVAT) Jurer'f gur oybbql ubhfr?

GUR FURORRAXRRCRE: Cheqba fgerrg. Fuvyyvat n obggyr bs fgbhg. Erfcrpgnoyr
jbzna.

GUR ANIIL: (TEVCCVAT GUR GJB ERQPBNGF, FGNTTREF SBEJNEQ JVGU GURZ) Pbzr
ba, lbh Oevgvfu nezl!

CEVINGR PNEE: (ORUVAQ UVF ONPX) Ur nvag unys onyzl.

CEVINGR PBZCGBA: (YNHTUF) Jung ub!

CEVINGR PNEE: (GB GUR ANIIL) Cbegboryyb oneenpxf pnagrra. Lbh nfx sbe
Pnee. Whfg Pnee.

GUR ANIIL: (FUBHGF)

    Jr ner gur oblf. Bs Jrksbeq.

CEVINGR PBZCGBA: Fnl! Jung cevpr gur fretrnagznwbe?

CEVINGR PNEE: Oraargg? Ur'f zl cny. V ybir byq Oraargg.

GUR ANIIL: (FUBHGF)

    Gur tnyyvat punva.
    Naq serr bhe angvir ynaq.

(UR FGNTTREF SBEJNEQ, QENTTVAT GURZ JVGU UVZ. OYBBZ FGBCF, NG SNHYG. GUR
QBT NCCEBNPURF, UVF GBATHR BHGYBYYVAT, CNAGVAT)

OYBBZ: Jvyqtbbfr punfr guvf. Qvfbeqreyl ubhfrf. Ybeq xabjf jurer gurl ner
tbar. Qehaxf pbire qvfgnapr qbhoyr dhvpx. Avpr zvkhc. Fprar ng Jrfgynaq
ebj. Gura whzc va svefg pynff jvgu guveq gvpxrg. Gura gbb sne. Genva jvgu
ratvar oruvaq. Zvtug unir gnxra zr gb Znynuvqr be n fvqvat sbe gur avtug
be pbyyvfvba. Frpbaq qevax qbrf vg. Bapr vf n qbfr. Jung nz V sbyybjvat
uvz sbe? Fgvyy, ur'f gur orfg bs gung ybg. Vs V unqa'g urneq nobhg Zef
Ornhsbl Chersbl V jbhyqa'g unir tbar naq jbhyqa'g unir zrg. Xvfzrg. Ur'yy
ybfr gung pnfu. Eryvrivat bssvpr urer. Tbbq ovm sbe purncwnpxf, betnaf.
Jung qb lr ynpx? Fbba tbg, fbba tbar. Zvtug unir ybfg zl yvsr gbb jvgu
gung znatbatjurrygenpxgebyyrltynerwhttreanhg bayl sbe cerfrapr bs zvaq.
Pna'g nyjnlf fnir lbh, gubhtu. Vs V unq cnffrq Gehrybpx'f jvaqbj gung qnl
gjb zvahgrf yngre jbhyq unir orra fubg. Nofrapr bs obql. Fgvyy vs ohyyrg
bayl jrag guebhtu zl pbng trg qnzntrf sbe fubpx, svir uhaqerq cbhaqf.
Jung jnf ur? Xvyqner fgerrg pyho gbss. Tbq uryc uvf tnzrxrrcre.

(UR TNMRF NURNQ, ERNQVAT BA GUR JNYY N FPENJYRQ PUNYX YRTRAQ Jrg Qernz
NAQ N CUNYYVP QRFVTA.) Bqq! Zbyyl qenjvat ba gur sebfgrq pneevntrcnar ng
Xvatfgbja. Jung'f gung yvxr? (TNHQL QBYYJBZRA YBYY VA GUR YVTUGRQ
QBBEJNLF, VA JVAQBJ RZOENFHERF, FZBXVAT OVEQFRLR PVTNERGGRF. GUR BQBHE BS
GUR FVPXFJRRG JRRQ SYBNGF GBJNEQF UVZ VA FYBJ EBHAQ BINYYVAT JERNGUF.)

GUR JERNGUF: Fjrrg ner gur fjrrgf. Fjrrgf bs fva.

OYBBZ: Zl fcvar'f n ovg yvzc. Tb be ghea? Naq guvf sbbq? Rng vg naq trg
nyy cvtfgvpxl. Nofheq V nz. Jnfgr bs zbarl. Bar naq rvtugcrapr gbb zhpu.
(GUR ERGEVRIRE QEVIRF N PBYQ FAVIRYYVAT ZHMMYR NTNVAFG UVF UNAQ, JNTTVAT
UVF GNVY.) Fgenatr ubj gurl gnxr gb zr. Rira gung oehgr gbqnl. Orggre
fcrnx gb uvz svefg. Yvxr jbzra gurl yvxr ERAPBAGERF. Fgvaxf yvxr n
cbyrpng. PUNPHA FBA TBHG. Ur zvtug or znq. Qbtqnlf. Hapregnva va uvf
zbirzragf. Tbbq sryybj! Svqb! Tbbq sryybj! Tneelbjra! (GUR JBYSQBT
FCENJYF BA UVF ONPX, JEVTTYVAT BOFPRARYL JVGU ORTTVAT CNJF, UVF YBAT
OYNPX GBATHR YBYYVAT BHG.) Vasyhrapr bs uvf fheebhaqvatf. Tvir naq unir
qbar jvgu vg. Cebivqrq abobql. (PNYYVAT RAPBHENTVAT JBEQF UR FUNZOYRF
ONPX JVGU N SHEGVIR CBNPURE'F GERNQ, QBTTRQ OL GUR FRGGRE VAGB N QNEX
FGNYRFGHAX PBEARE. UR HAEBYYF BAR CNEPRY NAQ TBRF GB QHZC GUR PEHORRA
FBSGYL OHG UBYQF ONPX NAQ SRRYF GUR GEBGGRE.) Fvmrnoyr sbe guerrcrapr.
Ohg gura V unir vg va zl yrsg unaq. Pnyyf sbe zber rssbeg. Jul? Fznyyre
sebz jnag bs hfr. B, yrg vg fyvqr. Gjb naq fvk.

(JVGU ERTERG UR YRGF GUR HAEBYYRQ PEHORRA NAQ GEBGGRE FYVQR. GUR ZNFGVSS
ZNHYF GUR OHAQYR PYHZFVYL NAQ TYHGF UVZFRYS JVGU TEBJYVAT TERRQ,
PEHAPUVAT GUR OBARF. GJB ENVAPNCRQ JNGPU NCCEBNPU, FVYRAG, IVTVYNAG. GURL
ZHEZHE GBTRGURE.)

GUR JNGPU: Oybbz. Bs Oybbz. Sbe Oybbz. Oybbz.

(RNPU YNLF UNAQ BA OYBBZ'F FUBHYQRE.)

SVEFG JNGPU: Pnhtug va gur npg. Pbzzvg ab ahvfnapr.

OYBBZ: (FGNZZREF) V nz qbvat tbbq gb bguref.

(N PBIRL BS THYYF, FGBEZ CRGERYF, EVFRF UHATEVYL SEBZ YVSSRL FYVZR JVGU
ONAOHEL PNXRF VA GURVE ORNXF.)

GUR THYYF: Xnj xnir xnaxhel xnxr.

OYBBZ: Gur sevraq bs zna. Genvarq ol xvaqarff.

(UR CBVAGF. OBO QBENA, GBCCYVAT SEBZ N UVTU ONEFGBBY, FJNLF BIRE GUR
ZHAPUVAT FCNAVRY.)

OBO QBENA: Gbjfre. Tvir hf gur cnj. Tvir gur cnj.

(GUR OHYYQBT TEBJYF, UVF FPEHSS FGNAQVAT, N TBOORG BS CVT'F XAHPXYR
ORGJRRA UVF ZBYNEF GUEBHTU JUVPU ENOVQ FPHZFCVGGYR QEVOOYRF. OBO QBENA
SVYYF FVYRAGYL VAGB NA NERN.)

FRPBAQ JNGPU: Ceriragvba bs pehrygl gb navznyf.

OYBBZ: (RAGUHFVNFGVPNYYL) N aboyr jbex! V fpbyqrq gung genzqevire ba
Unebyq'f pebff oevqtr sbe vyyhfvat gur cbbe ubefr jvgu uvf unearff fpno.
Onq Serapu V tbg sbe zl cnvaf. Bs pbhefr vg jnf sebfgl naq gur ynfg genz.
Nyy gnyrf bs pvephf yvsr ner uvtuyl qrzbenyvfvat.

(FVTABE ZNSSRV, CNFFVBACNYR, VA YVBAGNZRE'F PBFGHZR JVGU QVNZBAQ FGHQF VA
UVF FUVEGSEBAG, FGRCF SBEJNEQ, UBYQVAT N PVEPHF CNCREUBBC, N PHEYVAT
PNEEVNTRJUVC NAQ N ERIBYIRE JVGU JUVPU UR PBIREF GUR TBETVAT OBNEUBHAQ.)

FVTABE ZNSSRV: (JVGU N FVAVFGRE FZVYR) Ynqvrf naq tragyrzra, zl rqhpngrq
terlubhaq. Vg jnf V oebxr va gur ohpxvat oebapub Nwnk jvgu zl cngrag
fcvxrq fnqqyr sbe pneaviberf. Ynfu haqre gur oryyl jvgu n xabggrq gubat.
Oybpx gnpxyr naq n fgenatyvat chyyrl jvyy oevat lbhe yvba gb urry, ab
znggre ubj senpgvbhf, rira YRB SREBK gurer, gur Yvolna znarngre. N erqubg
pebjone naq fbzr yvavzrag ehoovat ba gur oheavat cneg cebqhprq Sevgm bs
Nzfgreqnz, gur guvaxvat ulran. (UR TYNERF) V cbffrff gur Vaqvna fvta. Gur
tyvag bs zl rlr qbrf vg jvgu gurfr oernfgfcnexyref. (JVGU N ORJVGPUVAT
FZVYR) V abj vagebqhpr Znqrzbvfryyr Ehol, gur cevqr bs gur evat.

SVEFG JNGPU: Pbzr. Anzr naq nqqerff.

OYBBZ: V unir sbetbggra sbe gur zbzrag. Nu, lrf! (UR GNXRF BSS UVF UVTU
TENQR UNG, FNYHGVAT) Qe Oybbz, Yrbcbyq, qragny fhetrba. Lbh unir urneq bs
iba Oyhz Cnfun. Hzcgrra zvyyvbaf. QBAAREJRGGRE! Bjaf unys Nhfgevn. Rtlcg.
Pbhfva.

SVEFG JNGPU: Cebbs.

(N PNEQ SNYYF SEBZ VAFVQR GUR YRNGURE URNQONAQ BS OYBBZ'F UNG.)

OYBBZ: (VA ERQ SRM, PNQV'F QERFF PBNG JVGU OEBNQ TERRA FNFU, JRNEVAT N
SNYFR ONQTR BS GUR YRTVBA BS UBABHE, CVPXF HC GUR PNEQ UNFGVYL NAQ BSSREF
VG) Nyybj zr. Zl pyho vf gur Whavbe Nezl naq Anil. Fbyvpvgbef: Zrffef
Wbua Urael Zragba, 27 Onpurybe'f Jnyx.

SVEFG JNGPU: (ERNQF) Urael Sybjre. Ab svkrq nobqr. Haynjshyyl jngpuvat
naq orfrggvat.

FRPBAQ JNGPU: Na nyvov. Lbh ner pnhgvbarq.

OYBBZ: (CEBQHPRF SEBZ UVF URNEGCBPXRG N PEHZCYRQ LRYYBJ SYBJRE) Guvf vf
gur sybjre va dhrfgvba. Vg jnf tvira zr ol n zna V qba'g xabj uvf anzr.
(CYNHFVOYL) Lbh xabj gung byq wbxr, ebfr bs Pnfgvyr. Oybbz. Gur punatr bs
anzr. Ivent. (UR ZHEZHEF CEVINGRYL NAQ PBASVQRAGVNYYL) Jr ner ratntrq lbh
frr, fretrnag. Ynql va gur pnfr. Ybir ragnatyrzrag. (UR FUBHYQREF GUR
FRPBAQ JNGPU TRAGYL) Qnfu vg nyy. Vg'f n jnl jr tnyynagf unir va gur
anil. Havsbez gung qbrf vg. (UR GHEAF TENIRYL GB GUR SVEFG JNGPU) Fgvyy,
bs pbhefr, lbh qb trg lbhe Jngreybb fbzrgvzrf. Qebc va fbzr riravat naq
unir n tynff bs byq Ohethaql. (GB GUR FRPBAQ JNGPU TNVYL) V'yy vagebqhpr
lbh, vafcrpgbe. Fur'f tnzr. Qb vg va gur funxr bs n ynzo'f gnvy.

(N QNEX ZREPHEVNYVFRQ SNPR NCCRNEF, YRNQVAT N IRVYRQ SVTHER.)

GUR QNEX ZREPHEL: Gur Pnfgyr vf ybbxvat sbe uvz. Ur jnf qehzzrq bhg bs
gur nezl.

ZNEGUN: (GUVPXIRVYRQ, N PEVZFBA UNYGRE EBHAQ URE ARPX, N PBCL BS GUR
Vevfu Gvzrf VA URE UNAQ, VA GBAR BS ERCEBNPU, CBVAGVAT) Urael! Yrbcbyq!
Yvbary, gubh ybfg bar! Pyrne zl anzr.

SVEFG JNGPU: (FGREAYL) Pbzr gb gur fgngvba.

OYBBZ: (FPNERQ, UNGF UVZFRYS, FGRCF ONPX, GURA, CYHPXVAT NG UVF URNEG NAQ
YVSGVAT UVF EVTUG SBERNEZ BA GUR FDHNER, UR TVIRF GUR FVTA NAQ QHRTHNEQ
BS SRYYBJPENSG) Ab, ab, jbefuvcshy znfgre, yvtug bs ybir. Zvfgnxra
vqragvgl. Gur Ylbaf znvy. Yrfhedhrf naq Qhobfp. Lbh erzrzore gur Puvyqf
sengevpvqr pnfr. Jr zrqvpny zra. Ol fgevxvat uvz qrnq jvgu n ungpurg. V
nz jebatshyyl npphfrq. Orggre bar thvygl rfpncr guna avarglavar
jebatshyyl pbaqrzarq.

ZNEGUN: (FBOOVAT ORUVAQ URE IRVY) Oernpu bs cebzvfr. Zl erny anzr vf
Crttl Tevssva. Ur jebgr gb zr gung ur jnf zvfrenoyr. V'yy gryy zl
oebgure, gur Orpgvir ehttre shyyonpx, ba lbh, urnegyrff syveg.

OYBBZ: (ORUVAQ UVF UNAQ) Fur'f qehax. Gur jbzna vf varoevngrq. (UR
ZHEZHEF INTHRYL GUR CNFF BS RCUENVZ) Fuvgoebyrrgu.

FRPBAQ JNGPU: (GRNEF VA UVF RLRF, GB OYBBZ) Lbh bhtug gb or gubebhtuyl
jryy nfunzrq bs lbhefrys.

OYBBZ: Tragyrzra bs gur whel, yrg zr rkcynva. N cher zner'f arfg. V nz n
zna zvfhaqrefgbbq. V nz orvat znqr n fpncrtbng bs. V nz n erfcrpgnoyr
zneevrq zna, jvgubhg n fgnva ba zl punenpgre. V yvir va Rppyrf fgerrg. Zl
jvsr, V nz gur qnhtugre bs n zbfg qvfgvathvfurq pbzznaqre, n tnyynag
hcfgnaqvat tragyrzna, jung qb lbh pnyy uvz, Znwbetrareny Oevna Gjrrql,
bar bs Oevgnva'f svtugvat zra jub urycrq gb jva bhe onggyrf. Tbg uvf
znwbevgl sbe gur urebvp qrsrapr bs Ebexr'f Qevsg.

SVEFG JNGPU: Ertvzrag.

OYBBZ: (GHEAF GB GUR TNYYREL) Gur eblny Qhoyvaf, oblf, gur fnyg bs gur
rnegu, xabja gur jbeyq bire. V guvax V frr fbzr byq pbzenqrf va nezf hc
gurer nzbat lbh. Gur E. Q. S., jvgu bhe bja Zrgebcbyvgna cbyvpr,
thneqvnaf bs bhe ubzrf, gur cyhpxvrfg ynqf naq gur svarfg obql bs zra, nf
culfvdhr, va gur freivpr bs bhe fbirervta.

N IBVPR: Gheapbng! Hc gur Obref! Jub obbrq Wbr Punzoreynva?

OYBBZ: (UVF UNAQ BA GUR FUBHYQRE BS GUR SVEFG JNGPU) Zl byq qnq gbb jnf n
W. C. V'z nf fgnhapu n Oevgvfure nf lbh ner, fve. V sbhtug jvgu gur
pbybhef sbe xvat naq pbhagel va gur nofragzvaqrq jne haqre trareny Tbhtu
va gur cnex naq jnf qvfnoyrq ng Fcvba Xbc naq Oybrzsbagrva, jnf zragvbarq
va qvfcngpurf. V qvq nyy n juvgr zna pbhyq. (JVGU DHVRG SRRYVAT) Wvz
Oyhqfb. Ubyq ure abmmyr ntnva gur onax.

SVEFG JNGPU: Cebsrffvba be genqr.

OYBBZ: Jryy, V sbyybj n yvgrenel bpphcngvba, nhgube-wbheanyvfg. Va snpg
jr ner whfg oevatvat bhg n pbyyrpgvba bs cevmr fgbevrf bs juvpu V nz gur
vairagbe, fbzrguvat gung vf na ragveryl arj qrcnegher. V nz pbaarpgrq
jvgu gur Oevgvfu naq Vevfu cerff. Vs lbh evat hc ...

(ZLYRF PENJSBEQ FGEVQRF BHG WREXVYL, N DHVYY ORGJRRA UVF GRRGU. UVF
FPNEYRG ORNX OYNMRF JVGUVA GUR NHERBYR BS UVF FGENJ UNG. UR QNATYRF N
UNAX BS FCNAVFU BAVBAF VA BAR UNAQ NAQ UBYQF JVGU GUR BGURE UNAQ N
GRYRCUBAR ERPRVIRE ABMMYR GB UVF RNE.)

ZLYRF PENJSBEQ: (UVF PBPX'F JNGGYRF JNTTVAT) Uryyb, friraglfrira
rvtugsbhe. Uryyb. SERRZNA'F HEVANY naq JRRXYL NEFRJVCR urer. Cnenylfr
Rhebcr. Lbh juvpu? Oyhrontf? Jub jevgrf? Vf vg Oybbz?

(ZE CUVYVC ORNHSBL, CNYRSNPRQ, FGNAQF VA GUR JVGARFFOBK, VA NPPHENGR
ZBEAVAT QERFF, BHGOERNFG CBPXRG JVGU CRNX BS UNAQXREPUVRS FUBJVAT,
PERNFRQ YNIRAQRE GEBHFREF NAQ CNGRAG OBBGF. UR PNEEVRF N YNETR CBEGSBYVB
YNORYYRQ Zngpunz'f Znfgrefgebxrf.)

ORNHSBL: (QENJYF) Ab, lbh nera'g. Abg ol n ybat fubg vs V xabj vg. V
qba'g frr vg gung'f nyy. Ab obea tragyrzna, ab-bar jvgu gur zbfg
ehqvzragnel cebzcgvatf bs n tragyrzna jbhyq fgbbc gb fhpu cnegvphyneyl
ybngufbzr pbaqhpg. Bar bs gubfr, zl ybeq. N cyntvnevfg. N fbncl farnx
znfdhrenqvat nf n yvggrengrhe. Vg'f cresrpgyl boivbhf gung jvgu gur zbfg
vaurerag onfrarff ur unf pevoorq fbzr bs zl orfgfryyvat pbcl, ernyyl
tbetrbhf fghss, n cresrpg trz, gur ybir cnffntrf va juvpu ner orarngu
fhfcvpvba. Gur Ornhsbl obbxf bs ybir naq terng cbffrffvbaf, jvgu juvpu
lbhe ybeqfuvc vf qbhogyrff snzvyvne, ner n ubhfrubyq jbeq guebhtubhg gur
xvatqbz.

OYBBZ: (ZHEZHEF JVGU UNATQBT ZRRXARFF TYHZ) Gung ovg nobhg gur ynhtuvat
jvgpu unaq va unaq V gnxr rkprcgvba gb, vs V znl ...

ORNHSBL: (UVF YVC HCPHEYRQ, FZVYRF FHCREPVYVBHFYL BA GUR PBHEG) Lbh shaal
nff, lbh! Lbh'er gbb ornfgyl njshyyl jrveq sbe jbeqf! V qba'g guvax lbh
arrq bire rkprffviryl qvfvapbzzbqngr lbhefrys va gung ertneq. Zl yvgrenel
ntrag Ze W. O. Cvaxre vf va nggraqnapr. V cerfhzr, zl ybeq, jr funyy
erprvir gur hfhny jvgarffrf' srrf, funa'g jr? Jr ner pbafvqrenoyl bhg bs
cbpxrg bire guvf onyyl cerffzna wbuaal, guvf wnpxqnj bs Eurvzf, jub unf
abg rira orra gb n havirefvgl.

OYBBZ: (VAQVFGVAPGYL) Havirefvgl bs yvsr. Onq neg.

ORNHSBL: (FUBHGF) Vg'f n qnzanoyl sbhy yvr, fubjvat gur zbeny ebggraarff
bs gur zna! (UR RKGRAQF UVF CBEGSBYVB) Jr unir urer qnzavat rivqrapr, gur
PBECHF QRYVPGV, zl ybeq, n fcrpvzra bs zl znghere jbex qvfsvtherq ol gur
unyyznex bs gur ornfg.

N IBVPR SEBZ GUR TNYYREL:

    Zbfrf, Zbfrf, xvat bs gur wrjf,
    Jvcrq uvf nefr va gur Qnvyl Arjf.

OYBBZ: (OENIRYL) Bireqenja.

ORNHSBL: Lbh ybj pnq! Lbh bhtug gb or qhpxrq va gur ubefrcbaq, lbh
ebggre! (GB GUR PBHEG) Jul, ybbx ng gur zna'f cevingr yvsr! Yrnqvat n
dhnqehcyr rkvfgrapr! Fgerrg natry naq ubhfr qrivy. Abg svg gb or
zragvbarq va zvkrq fbpvrgl! Gur nepupbafcvengbe bs gur ntr!

OYBBZ: (GB GUR PBHEG) Naq ur, n onpurybe, ubj ...

SVEFG JNGPU: Gur Xvat irefhf Oybbz. Pnyy gur jbzna Qevfpbyy.

GUR PEVRE: Znel Qevfpbyy, fphyyrelznvq!

(ZNEL QEVFPBYY, N FYVCFUBQ FREINAG TVEY, NCCEBNPURF. FUR UNF N OHPXRG BA
GUR PEBBX BS URE NEZ NAQ N FPBHEVATOEHFU VA URE UNAQ.)

FRPBAQ JNGPU: Nabgure! Ner lbh bs gur hasbeghangr pynff?

ZNEL QEVFPBYY: (VAQVTANAGYL) V'z abg n onq bar. V orne n erfcrpgnoyr
punenpgre naq jnf sbhe zbaguf va zl ynfg cynpr. V jnf va n fvghngvba, fvk
cbhaqf n lrne naq zl punaprf jvgu Sevqnlf bhg naq V unq gb yrnir bjvat gb
uvf pneelvatf ba.

SVEFG JNGPU: Jung qb lbh gnk uvz jvgu?

ZNEL QEVFPBYY: Ur znqr n pregnva fhttrfgvba ohg V gubhtug zber bs zlfrys
nf cbbe nf V nz.

OYBBZ: (VA UBHFRWNPXRG BS EVCCYRPYBGU, SYNAARY GEBHFREF, URRYYRFF
FYVCCREF, HAFUNIRA, UVF UNVE EHZCYRQ: FBSGYL) V gerngrq lbh juvgr. V tnir
lbh zrzragbf, fzneg rzrenyq tnegref sne nobir lbhe fgngvba. Vapnhgvbhfyl
V gbbx lbhe cneg jura lbh jrer npphfrq bs cvysrevat. Gurer'f n zrqvhz va
nyy guvatf. Cynl pevpxrg.

ZNEL QEVFPBYY: (RKPVGRQYL) Nf Tbq vf ybbxvat qbja ba zr guvf avtug vs
rire V ynvq n unaq gb gurz blfgref!

SVEFG JNGPU: Gur bssrapr pbzcynvarq bs? Qvq fbzrguvat unccra?

ZNEL QEVFPBYY: Ur fhecevfrq zr va gur erer bs gur cerzvfrf, Lbhe ubabhe,
jura gur zvffhf jnf bhg fubccvat bar zbeavat jvgu n erdhrfg sbe n fnsrgl
cva. Ur uryq zr naq V jnf qvfpbybherq va sbhe cynprf nf n erfhyg. Naq ur
vagresrerq gjvpg jvgu zl pybguvat.

OYBBZ: Fur pbhagrenffnhygrq.

ZNEL QEVFPBYY: (FPBEASHYYL) V unq zber erfcrpg sbe gur fpbhevatoehfu, fb
V unq. V erzbafgengrq jvgu uvz, Lbhe ybeq, naq ur erznexrq: xrrc vg
dhvrg.

(TRARENY YNHTUGRE.)

TRBETR SBGGERYY: (PYREX BS GUR PEBJA NAQ CRNPR, ERFBANAGYL) Beqre va
pbheg! Gur npphfrq jvyy abj znxr n obthf fgngrzrag.

(OYBBZ, CYRNQVAT ABG THVYGL NAQ UBYQVAT N SHYYOYBJA JNGREYVYL, ORTVAF N
YBAT HAVAGRYYVTVOYR FCRRPU. GURL JBHYQ URNE JUNG PBHAFRY UNQ GB FNL VA
UVF FGVEEVAT NQQERFF GB GUR TENAQ WHEL. UR JNF QBJA NAQ BHG OHG, GUBHTU
OENAQRQ NF N OYNPX FURRC, VS UR ZVTUG FNL FB, UR ZRNAG GB ERSBEZ, GB
ERGEVRIR GUR ZRZBEL BS GUR CNFG VA N CHERYL FVFGREYL JNL NAQ ERGHEA GB
ANGHER NF N CHERYL QBZRFGVP NAVZNY. N FRIRAZBAGUF' PUVYQ, UR UNQ ORRA
PNERSHYYL OEBHTUG HC NAQ AHEGHERQ OL NA NTRQ ORQEVQQRA CNERAG. GURER
ZVTUG UNIR ORRA YNCFRF BS NA REEVAT SNGURE OHG UR JNAGRQ GB GHEA BIRE N
ARJ YRNS NAQ ABJ, JURA NG YBAT YNFG VA FVTUG BS GUR JUVCCVAT CBFG, GB
YRNQ N UBZRYL YVSR VA GUR RIRAVAT BS UVF QNLF, CREZRNGRQ OL GUR
NSSRPGVBANGR FHEEBHAQVATF BS GUR URNIVAT OBFBZ BS GUR SNZVYL. NA
NPPYVZNGVFRQ OEVGVFURE, UR UNQ FRRA GUNG FHZZRE RIR SEBZ GUR SBBGCYNGR BS
NA RATVAR PNO BS GUR YBBC YVAR ENVYJNL PBZCNAL JUVYR GUR ENVA ERSENVARQ
SEBZ SNYYVAT TYVZCFRF, NF VG JRER, GUEBHTU GUR JVAQBJF BS YBIRSHY
UBHFRUBYQF VA QHOYVA PVGL NAQ HEONA QVFGEVPG BS FPRARF GEHYL EHENY BS
UNCCVARFF BS GUR ORGGRE YNAQ JVGU QBPXERYY'F JNYYCNCRE NG BAR NAQ
AVARCRAPR N QBMRA, VAABPRAG OEVGVFUOBEA ONVEAF YVFCVAT CENLREF GB GUR
FNPERQ VASNAG, LBHGUSHY FPUBYNEF TENCCYVAT JVGU GURVE CRAFHZF BE ZBQRY
LBHAT YNQVRF CYNLVAT BA GUR CVNABSBEGR BE NABA NYY JVGU SREIBHE ERPVGVAT
GUR SNZVYL EBFNEL EBHAQ GUR PENPXYVAT LHYRYBT JUVYR VA GUR OBERRAF NAQ
TERRA YNARF GUR PBYYRRAF JVGU GURVE FJNVAF FGEBYYRQ JUNG GVZRF GUR
FGENVAF BS GUR BETNAGBARQ ZRYBQRBA OEVGNAAVN ZRGNYOBHAQ JVGU SBHE NPGVAT
FGBCF NAQ GJRYIRSBYQ ORYYBJF, N FNPEVSVPR, TERNGRFG ONETNVA RIRE...)

(ERARJRQ YNHTUGRE. UR ZHZOYRF VAPBURERAGYL. ERCBEGREF PBZCYNVA GUNG GURL
PNAABG URNE.)

YBATUNAQ NAQ FUBEGUNAQ: (JVGUBHG YBBXVAT HC SEBZ GURVE ABGROBBXF) Ybbfra
uvf obbgf.

CEBSRFFBE ZNPUHTU: (SEBZ GUR CERFFGNOYR, PBHTUF NAQ PNYYF) Pbhtu vg hc,
zna. Trg vg bhg va ovgf.

(GUR PEBFFRKNZVANGVBA CEBPRRQF ER OYBBZ NAQ GUR OHPXRG. N YNETR OHPXRG.
OYBBZ UVZFRYS. OBJRY GEBHOYR. VA ORNIRE FGERRG TEVCR, LRF. DHVGR ONQ. N
CYNFGRERE'F OHPXRG. OL JNYXVAT FGVSSYRTTRQ. FHSSRERQ HAGBYQ ZVFREL.
QRNQYL NTBAL. NOBHG ABBA. YBIR BE OHETHAQL. LRF, FBZR FCVANPU. PEHPVNY
ZBZRAG. UR QVQ ABG YBBX VA GUR OHPXRG ABOBQL. ENGURE N ZRFF. ABG
PBZCYRGRYL. N Gvgovgf ONPX AHZORE.)

(HCEBNE NAQ PNGPNYYF. OYBBZ VA N GBEA SEBPXPBNG FGNVARQ JVGU JUVGRJNFU,
QVATRQ FVYX UNG FVQRJNLF BA UVF URNQ, N FGEVC BS FGVPXVATCYNFGRE NPEBFF
UVF ABFR, GNYXF VANHQVOYL.)

W. W. B'ZBYYBL: (VA ONEEVFGRE'F TERL JVT NAQ FGHSSTBJA, FCRNXVAT JVGU N
IBVPR BS CNVARQ CEBGRFG) Guvf vf ab cynpr sbe vaqrprag yrivgl ng gur
rkcrafr bs na reevat zbegny qvfthvfrq va yvdhbe. Jr ner abg va n
ornetneqra abe ng na Bksbeq ent abe vf guvf n genirfgl bs whfgvpr. Zl
pyvrag vf na vasnag, n cbbe sbervta vzzvtenag jub fgnegrq fpengpu nf n
fgbjnjnl naq vf abj gelvat gb ghea na ubarfg craal. Gur gehzcrq hc
zvfqrzrnabhe jnf qhr gb n zbzragnel noreengvba bs urerqvgl, oebhtug ba ol
unyyhpvangvba, fhpu snzvyvnevgvrf nf gur nyyrtrq thvygl bppheerapr orvat
dhvgr crezvggrq va zl pyvrag'f angvir cynpr, gur ynaq bs gur Cunenbu.
CEVZN SNPVR, V chg vg gb lbh gung gurer jnf ab nggrzcg ng pneanyyl
xabjvat. Vagvznpl qvq abg bpphe naq gur bssrapr pbzcynvarq bs ol
Qevfpbyy, gung ure iveghr jnf fbyvpvgrq, jnf abg ercrngrq. V jbhyq qrny
va rfcrpvny jvgu ngnivfz. Gurer unir orra pnfrf bs fuvcjerpx naq
fbzanzohyvfz va zl pyvrag'f snzvyl. Vs gur npphfrq pbhyq fcrnx ur pbhyq n
gnyr hasbyq--bar bs gur fgenatrfg gung unir rire orra aneengrq orgjrra
gur pbiref bs n obbx. Ur uvzfrys, zl ybeq, vf n culfvpny jerpx sebz
pbooyre'f jrnx purfg. Uvf fhozvffvba vf gung ur vf bs Zbatbyvna
rkgenpgvba naq veerfcbafvoyr sbe uvf npgvbaf. Abg nyy gurer, va snpg.

OYBBZ: (ONERSBBG, CVTRBAOERNFGRQ, VA YNFPNE'F IRFG NAQ GEBHFREF,
NCBYBTRGVP GBRF GHEARQ VA, BCRAF UVF GVAL ZBYR'F RLRF NAQ YBBXF NOBHG UVZ
QNMRQYL, CNFFVAT N FYBJ UNAQ NPEBFF UVF SBERURNQ. GURA UR UVGPURF UVF
ORYG FNVYBE SNFUVBA NAQ JVGU N FUEHT BS BEVRAGNY BORVFNAPR FNYHGRF GUR
PBHEG, CBVAGVAT BAR GUHZO URNIRAJNEQ.) Uvz znxrr iryyl zhpurr svar avtug.
(UR ORTVAF GB YVYG FVZCYL)

    Yv yv cbb yvy puvyr
    Oyvatrr cvtsbbg riyl avtug
    Cnlrr gjb fuvyyl ...

(UR VF UBJYRQ QBJA.)

W. W. B'ZBYYBL: (UBGYL GB GUR CBCHYNPR) Guvf vf n ybarunaq svtug. Ol
Unqrf, V jvyy abg unir nal pyvrag bs zvar tnttrq naq onqtrerq va guvf
snfuvba ol n cnpx bs phef naq ynhtuvat ulranf. Gur Zbfnvp pbqr unf
fhcrefrqrq gur ynj bs gur whatyr. V fnl vg naq V fnl vg rzcungvpnyyl,
jvgubhg jvfuvat sbe bar zbzrag gb qrsrng gur raqf bs whfgvpr, npphfrq jnf
abg npprffbel orsber gur npg naq cebfrphgevk unf abg orra gnzcrerq jvgu.
Gur lbhat crefba jnf gerngrq ol qrsraqnag nf vs fur jrer uvf irel bja
qnhtugre. (OYBBZ GNXRF W. W. B'ZBYYBL'F UNAQ NAQ ENVFRF VG GB UVF YVCF.)
V funyy pnyy erohggvat rivqrapr gb cebir hc gb gur uvyg gung gur uvqqra
unaq vf ntnva ng vgf byq tnzr. Jura va qbhog crefrphgr Oybbz. Zl pyvrag,
na vaangryl onfushy zna, jbhyq or gur ynfg zna va gur jbeyq gb qb
nalguvat hatragyrznayl juvpu vawherq zbqrfgl pbhyq bowrpg gb be pnfg n
fgbar ng n tvey jub gbbx gur jebat gheavat jura fbzr qnfgneq, erfcbafvoyr
sbe ure pbaqvgvba, unq jbexrq uvf bja fjrrg jvyy ba ure. Ur jnagf gb tb
fgenvtug. V ertneq uvz nf gur juvgrfg zna V xabj. Ur vf qbja ba uvf yhpx
ng cerfrag bjvat gb gur zbegtntvat bs uvf rkgrafvir cebcregl ng Ntraqngu
Argnvz va snenjnl Nfvn Zvabe, fyvqrf bs juvpu jvyy abj or fubja. (GB
OYBBZ) V fhttrfg gung lbh jvyy qb gur unaqfbzr guvat.

OYBBZ: N craal va gur cbhaq.

(GUR VZNTR BS GUR YNXR BS XVAARERGU JVGU OYHEERQ PNGGYR PEBCCVAT VA
FVYIRE UNMR VF CEBWRPGRQ BA GUR JNYY. ZBFRF QYHTNPM, SREERGRLRQ NYOVAB,
VA OYHR QHATNERRF, FGNAQF HC VA GUR TNYYREL, UBYQVAT VA RNPU UNAQ NA
BENATR PVGEBA NAQ N CBEX XVQARL.)

QYHTNPM: (UBNEFRYL) Oyrvogerhfgenffr, Oreyva, J.13.

(W. W. B'ZBYYBL FGRCF BA GB N YBJ CYVAGU NAQ UBYQF GUR YNCRY BS UVF PBNG
JVGU FBYRZAVGL. UVF SNPR YRATGURAF, TEBJF CNYR NAQ ORNEQRQ, JVGU FHAXRA
RLRF, GUR OYBGPURF BS CUGUVFVF NAQ URPGVP PURRXOBARF BS WBUA S. GNLYBE.
UR NCCYVRF UVF UNAQXREPUVRS GB UVF ZBHGU NAQ FPEHGVAVFRF GUR TNYYBCVAT
GVQR BS EBFRCVAX OYBBQ.)

W.W.B'ZBYYBL: (NYZBFG IBVPRYRFFYL) Rkphfr zr. V nz fhssrevat sebz n
frirer puvyy, unir erpragyl pbzr sebz n fvpxorq. N srj jryypubfra jbeqf.
(UR NFFHZRF GUR NIVAR URNQ, SBKL ZBHFGNPUR NAQ CEBOBFPVQNY RYBDHRAPR BS
FRLZBHE OHFUR.) Jura gur natry'f obbx pbzrf gb or bcrarq vs nhtug gung
gur crafvir obfbz unf vanhthengrq bs fbhygenafsvtherq naq bs
fbhygenafsvthevat qrfreirf gb yvir V fnl nppbeq gur cevfbare ng gur one
gur fnperq orarsvg bs gur qbhog. (N CNCRE JVGU FBZRGUVAT JEVGGRA BA VG VF
UNAQRQ VAGB PBHEG.)

OYBBZ: (VA PBHEG QERFF) Pna tvir orfg ersreraprf. Zrffef Pnyyna, Pbyrzna.
Ze Jvfqbz Uryl W. C. Zl byq puvrs Wbr Phssr. Ze I. O. Qvyyba, rk ybeq
znlbe bs Qhoyva. V unir zbirq va gur punezrq pvepyr bs gur uvturfg ...
Dhrraf bs Qhoyva fbpvrgl. (PNERYRFFYL) V jnf whfg punggvat guvf nsgreabba
ng gur ivprertny ybqtr gb zl byq cnyf, fve Eboreg naq ynql Onyy,
nfgebabzre eblny ng gur yrirr. Fve Obo, V fnvq ...

ZEF LRYIREGBA ONEEL: (VA YBJPBEFNTRQ BCNY ONYYQERFF NAQ RYOBJYRATGU VIBEL
TYBIRF, JRNEVAT N FNOYRGEVZZRQ OEVPXDHVYGRQ QBYZNA, N PBZO BS OEVYYVNAGF
NAQ CNANPUR BS BFCERL VA URE UNVE) Neerfg uvz, pbafgnoyr. Ur jebgr zr na
nabalzbhf yrggre va ceragvpr onpxunaq jura zl uhfonaq jnf va gur Abegu
Evqvat bs Gvccrenel ba gur Zhafgre pvephvg, fvtarq Wnzrf Ybirovepu. Ur
fnvq gung ur unq frra sebz gur tbqf zl crreyrff tyborf nf V fng va n obk
bs gur GURNGER EBLNY ng n pbzznaq cresbeznapr bs YN PVTNYR. V qrrcyl
vasynzrq uvz, ur fnvq. Ur znqr vzcebcre biregherf gb zr gb zvfpbaqhpg
zlfrys ng unys cnfg sbhe c.z. ba gur sbyybjvat Guhefqnl, Qhafvax gvzr. Ur
bssrerq gb fraq zr guebhtu gur cbfg n jbex bs svpgvba ol Zbafvrhe Cnhy qr
Xbpx, ragvgyrq GUR TVEY JVGU GUR GUERR CNVEF BS FGNLF.

ZEF ORYYVATUNZ: (VA PNC NAQ FRNY PBARL ZNAGYR, JENCCRQ HC GB GUR ABFR,
FGRCF BHG BS URE OEBHTUNZ NAQ FPNAF GUEBHTU GBEGBVFRFURYY DHVMMVAT-
TYNFFRF JUVPU FUR GNXRF SEBZ VAFVQR URE UHTR BCBFFHZ ZHSS) Nyfb gb zr.
Lrf, V oryvrir vg vf gur fnzr bowrpgvbanoyr crefba. Orpnhfr ur pybfrq zl
pneevntr qbbe bhgfvqr fve Gubeayrl Fgbxre'f bar fyrrgl qnl qhevat gur
pbyq fanc bs Sroehnel avarglguerr jura rira gur tevq bs gur jnfgrcvcr naq
gur onyyfgbc va zl ongu pvfgrea jrer sebmra. Fhofrdhragyl ur rapybfrq n
oybbz bs rqryjrvff phyyrq ba gur urvtugf, nf ur fnvq, va zl ubabhe. V unq
vg rknzvarq ol n obgnavpny rkcreg naq ryvpvgrq gur vasbezngvba gung vg
jnf noybffbz bs gur ubzrtebja cbgngb cynag cheybvarq sebz n sbepvatpnfr
bs gur zbqry snez.

ZEF LRYIREGBA ONEEL: Funzr ba uvz!

(N PEBJQ BS FYHGF NAQ ENTNZHSSVAF FHETRF SBEJNEQ)

GUR FYHGF NAQ ENTNZHSSVAF: (FPERNZVAT) Fgbc guvrs! Uheenu gurer,
Oyhrorneq! Guerr purref sbe Vxrl Zb!

FRPBAQ JNGPU: (CEBQHPRF UNAQPHSSF) Urer ner gur qneovrf.

ZEF ORYYVATUNZ: Ur nqqerffrq zr va frireny unaqjevgvatf jvgu shyfbzr
pbzcyvzragf nf n Irahf va shef naq nyyrtrq cebsbhaq cvgl sbe zl
sebfgobhaq pbnpuzna Cnyzre juvyr va gur fnzr oerngu ur rkcerffrq uvzfrys
nf raivbhf bs uvf rnesyncf naq syrrpl furrcfxvaf naq bs uvf sbeghangr
cebkvzvgl gb zl crefba, jura fgnaqvat oruvaq zl punve jrnevat zl yvirel
naq gur nezbevny ornevatf bs gur Oryyvatunz rfphgpurba tneavfurq fnoyr, n
ohpx'f urnq pbhcrq be. Ur ynhqrq nyzbfg rkgenintnagyl zl argure
rkgerzvgvrf, zl fjryyvat pnyirf va fvyx ubfr qenja hc gb gur yvzvg, naq
rhybtvfrq tybjvatyl zl bgure uvqqra gernfherf va cevpryrff ynpr juvpu, ur
fnvq, ur pbhyq pbawher hc. Ur hetrq zr (fgngvat gung ur sryg vg uvf
zvffvba va yvsr gb hetr zr) gb qrsvyr gur zneevntr orq, gb pbzzvg
nqhygrel ng gur rneyvrfg cbffvoyr bccbeghavgl.

GUR UBABHENOYR ZEF ZREILA GNYOBLF: (VA NZNMBA PBFGHZR, UNEQ UNG,
WNPXOBBGF PBPXFCHEERQ, IREZVYVBA JNVFGPBNG, SNJA ZHFXRGRRE TNHAGYRGF JVGU
OENVQRQ QEHZF, YBAT GENVA URYQ HC NAQ UHAGVAT PEBC JVGU JUVPU FUR FGEVXRF
URE JRYG PBAFGNAGYL) Nyfb zr. Orpnhfr ur fnj zr ba gur cbyb tebhaq bs gur
Cubravk cnex ng gur zngpu Nyy Verynaq irefhf gur Erfg bs Verynaq. Zl
rlrf, V xabj, fubar qvivaryl nf V jngpurq Pncgnva Fybttre Qraarul bs gur
Vaavfxvyyvatf jva gur svany puhxxne ba uvf qneyvat pbo PRAGNHE. Guvf
cyrorvna Qba Whna bofreirq zr sebz oruvaq n unpxarl pne naq frag zr va
qbhoyr rairybcrf na bofprar cubgbtencu, fhpu nf ner fbyq nsgre qnex ba
Cnevf obhyrineqf, vafhygvat gb nal ynql. V unir vg fgvyy. Vg ercerfragf n
cnegvnyyl ahqr frabevgn, senvy naq ybiryl (uvf jvsr, nf ur fbyrzayl
nffherq zr, gnxra ol uvz sebz angher), cenpgvfvat vyyvpvg vagrepbhefr
jvgu n zhfphyne gbereb, rivqragyl n oynpxthneq. Ur hetrq zr gb qb
yvxrjvfr, gb zvforunir, gb fva jvgu bssvpref bs gur tneevfba. Ur vzcyberq
zr gb fbvy uvf yrggre va na hafcrnxnoyr znaare, gb punfgvfr uvz nf ur
evpuyl qrfreirf, gb orfgevqr naq evqr uvz, gb tvir uvz n zbfg ivpvbhf
ubefrjuvccvat.

ZEF ORYYVATUNZ: Zr gbb.

ZEF LRYIREGBA ONEEL: Zr gbb.

(FRIRENY UVTUYL ERFCRPGNOYR QHOYVA YNQVRF UBYQ HC VZCEBCRE YRGGREF
ERPRVIRQ SEBZ OYBBZ.)

GUR UBABHENOYR ZEF ZREILA GNYOBLF: (FGNZCF URE WVATYVAT FCHEF VA N FHQQRA
CNEBKLFZ BS SHEL) V jvyy, ol gur Tbq nobir zr. V'yy fpbhetr gur
cvtrbayvirerq phe nf ybat nf V pna fgnaq bire uvz. V'yy synl uvz nyvir.

OYBBZ: (UVF RLRF PYBFVAT, DHNVYF RKCRPGNAGYL) Urer? (UR FDHVEZF) Ntnva!
(UR CNAGF PEVATVAT) V ybir gur qnatre.

GUR UBABHENOYR ZEF ZREILA GNYOBLF: Irel zhpu fb! V'yy znxr vg ubg sbe
lbh. V'yy znxr lbh qnapr Wnpx Ynggra sbe gung.

ZEF ORYYVATUNZ: Gna uvf oerrpu jryy, gur hcfgneg! Jevgr gur fgnef naq
fgevcrf ba vg!

ZEF LRYIREGBA ONEEL: Qvftenprshy! Gurer'f ab rkphfr sbe uvz! N zneevrq
zna!

OYBBZ: Nyy gurfr crbcyr. V zrnag bayl gur fcnaxvat vqrn. N jnez gvatyvat
tybj jvgubhg rsshfvba. Ersvarq ovepuvat gb fgvzhyngr gur pvephyngvba.

GUR UBABHENOYR ZEF ZREILA GNYOBLF: (YNHTUF QREVFVIRYL) B, qvq lbh, zl
svar sryybj? Jryy, ol gur yvivat Tbq, lbh'yy trg gur fhecevfr bs lbhe
yvsr abj, oryvrir zr, gur zbfg hazrepvshy uvqvat n zna rire onetnvarq
sbe. Lbh unir ynfurq gur qbeznag gvterff va zl angher vagb shel.

ZEF ORYYVATUNZ: (FUNXRF URE ZHSS NAQ DHVMMVAT-TYNFFRF IVAQVPGVIRYL) Znxr
uvz fzneg, Unaan qrne. Tvir uvz tvatre. Guenfu gur zbatery jvguva na vapu
bs uvf yvsr. Gur png-b'-avar-gnvyf. Tryq uvz. Ivivfrpg uvz.

OYBBZ: (FUHQQREVAT, FUEVAXVAT, WBVAF UVF UNAQF: JVGU UNATQBT ZVRA) B
pbyq! B fuvirel! Vg jnf lbhe nzoebfvny ornhgl. Sbetrg, sbetvir. Xvfzrg.
Yrg zr bss guvf bapr. (UR BSSREF GUR BGURE PURRX)

ZEF LRYIREGBA ONEEL: (FRIRERYL) Qba'g qb fb ba nal nppbhag, Zef Gnyoblf!
Ur fubhyq or fbhaqyl gebhaprq!

GUR UBABHENOYR ZEF ZREILA GNYOBLF: (HAOHGGBAVAT URE TNHAGYRG IVBYRAGYL)
V'yy qb ab fhpu guvat. Cvtqbt naq nyjnlf jnf rire fvapr ur jnf chccrq! Gb
qner nqqerff zr! V'yy sybt uvz oynpx naq oyhr va gur choyvp fgerrgf. V'yy
qvt zl fchef va uvz hc gb gur ebjry. Ur vf n jryyxabja phpxbyq. (FUR
FJVFURF URE UHAGVATPEBC FNINTRYL VA GUR NVE) Gnxr qbja uvf gebhfref
jvgubhg ybff bs gvzr. Pbzr urer, fve! Dhvpx! Ernql?

OYBBZ: (GERZOYVAT, ORTVAAVAT GB BORL) Gur jrngure unf orra fb jnez.

(QNIL FGRCURAF, EVATYRGGRQ, CNFFRF JVGU N ORIL BS ONERSBBG ARJFOBLF.)

QNIL FGRCURAF: ZRFFRATRE BS GUR FNPERQ URNEG naq RIRAVAT GRYRTENCU jvgu
Fnvag Cngevpx'f Qnl fhccyrzrag. Pbagnvavat gur arj nqqerffrf bs nyy gur
phpxbyqf va Qhoyva.

(GUR IREL ERIRERAQ PNABA B'UNAYBA VA PYBGU BS TBYQ PBCR RYRINGRF NAQ
RKCBFRF N ZNEOYR GVZRCVRPR. ORSBER UVZ SNGURE PBAEBL NAQ GUR ERIRERAQ
WBUA UHTURF F.W. ORAQ YBJ.)

GUR GVZRCVRPR: (HACBEGNYYVAT)


    Phpxbb.
    Phpxbb.
    Phpxbb.


(GUR OENFF DHBVGF BS N ORQ NER URNEQ GB WVATYR.)

GUR DHBVGF: Wvtwnt. Wvtnwvtn. Wvtwnt.

(N CNARY BS SBT EBYYF ONPX ENCVQYL, ERIRNYVAT ENCVQYL VA GUR WHELOBK GUR
SNPRF BS ZNEGVA PHAAVATUNZ, SBERZNA, FVYXUNGGRQ, WNPX CBJRE, FVZBA
QRQNYHF, GBZ XREANA, ARQ YNZOREG, WBUA URAEL ZRAGBA ZLYRF PENJSBEQ,
YRARUNA, CNQQL YRBANEQ, ABFRL SYLAA, Z'PBL NAQ GUR SRNGHERYRFF SNPR BS N
ANZRYRFF BAR.)

GUR ANZRYRFF BAR: Oneronpx evqvat. Jrvtug sbe ntr. Tbo, ur betnavfrq ure.

GUR WHEBEF: (NYY GURVE URNQF GHEARQ GB UVF IBVPR) Ernyyl?

GUR ANZRYRFF BAR: (FANEYF) Nefr bire gvc. Uhaqerq fuvyyvatf gb svir.

GUR WHEBEF: (NYY GURVE URNQF YBJRERQ VA NFFRAG) Zbfg bs hf gubhtug nf
zhpu.

SVEFG JNGPU: Ur vf n znexrq zna. Nabgure tvey'f cynvg phg. Jnagrq: Wnpx
gur Evccre. N gubhfnaq cbhaqf erjneq.

FRPBAQ JNGPU: (NJRQ, JUVFCREF) Naq va oynpx. N zbezba. Nanepuvfg.

GUR PEVRE: (YBHQYL) Jurernf Yrbcbyq Oybbz bs ab svkrq nobqr vf n
jryyxabja qlanzvgneq, sbetre, ovtnzvfg, onjq naq phpxbyq naq n choyvp
ahvfnapr gb gur pvgvmraf bs Qhoyva naq jurernf ng guvf pbzzvffvba bs
nffvmrf gur zbfg ubabhenoyr ...

(UVF UBABHE, FVE SERQREVPX SNYXVARE, ERPBEQRE BS QHOYVA, VA WHQVPVNY TNEO
BS TERL FGBAR EVFRF SEBZ GUR ORAPU, FGBARORNEQRQ. UR ORNEF VA UVF NEZF NA
HZOERYYN FPRCGER. SEBZ UVF SBERURNQ NEVFR FGNEXYL GUR ZBFNVP ENZFUBEAF.)

GUR ERPBEQRE: V jvyy chg na raq gb guvf juvgr fynir genssvp naq evq
Qhoyva bs guvf bqvbhf crfg. Fpnaqnybhf! (UR QBAF GUR OYNPX PNC) Yrg uvz
or gnxra, Ze Fhofurevss, sebz gur qbpx jurer ur abj fgnaqf naq qrgnvarq
va phfgbql va Zbhagwbl cevfba qhevat Uvf Znwrfgl'f cyrnfher naq gurer or
unatrq ol gur arpx hagvy ur vf qrnq naq gurerva snvy abg ng lbhe crevy be
znl gur Ybeq unir zrepl ba lbhe fbhy. Erzbir uvz. (N OYNPX FXHYYPNC
QRFPRAQF HCBA UVF URNQ.)

(GUR FHOFUREVSS YBAT WBUA SNAAVAT NCCRNEF, FZBXVAT N CHATRAG URAEL PYNL.)

YBAT WBUA SNAAVAT: (FPBJYF NAQ PNYYF JVGU EVPU EBYYVAT HGGRENAPR) Jub'yy
unat Whqnf Vfpnevbg?

(U. EHZOBYQ, ZNFGRE ONEORE, VA N OYBBQPBYBHERQ WREXVA NAQ GNAARE'F NCEBA,
N EBCR PBVYRQ BIRE UVF FUBHYQRE, ZBHAGF GUR OYBPX. N YVSR CERFREIRE NAQ N
ANVYFGHQQRQ OYHQTRBA NER FGHPX VA UVF ORYG. UR EHOF TEVZYL UVF TENCCYVAT
UNAQF, XABOORQ JVGU XAHPXYRQHFGREF.)

EHZOBYQ: (GB GUR ERPBEQRE JVGU FVAVFGRE SNZVYVNEVGL) Unatvat Uneel, lbhe
Znwrfgl, gur Zrefrl greebe. Svir thvarnf n whthyne. Arpx be abguvat.

(GUR ORYYF BS TRBETR'F PUHEPU GBYY FYBJYL, YBHQ QNEX VEBA.)

GUR ORYYF: Urvtub! Urvtub!

OYBBZ: (QRFCRENGRYL) Jnvg. Fgbc. Thyyf. Tbbq urneg. V fnj. Vaabprapr.
Tvey va gur zbaxrlubhfr. Mbb. Yrjq puvzcnamrr. (OERNGUYRFFYL) Cryivp
onfva. Ure negyrff oyhfu haznaarq zr. (BIREPBZR JVGU RZBGVBA) V yrsg gur
cerpvapgf. (UR GHEAF GB N SVTHER VA GUR PEBJQ, NCCRNYVAT) Ularf, znl V
fcrnx gb lbh? Lbh xabj zr. Gung guerr fuvyyvatf lbh pna xrrc. Vs lbh jnag
n yvggyr zber ...

ULARF: (PBYQYL) Lbh ner n cresrpg fgenatre.

FRPBAQ JNGPU: (CBVAGF GB GUR PBEARE) Gur obzo vf urer.

SVEFG JNGPU: Vasreany znpuvar jvgu n gvzr shfr.

OYBBZ: Ab, ab. Cvt'f srrg. V jnf ng n shareny.

SVEFG JNGPU: (QENJF UVF GEHAPURBA) Yvne!

(GUR ORNTYR YVSGF UVF FABHG, FUBJVAT GUR TERL FPBEOHGVP SNPR BS CNQQL
QVTANZ. UR UNF TANJRQ NYY. UR RKUNYRF N CHGEVQ PNEPNFRSRQ OERNGU. UR
TEBJF GB UHZNA FVMR NAQ FUNCR. UVF QNPUFUHAQ PBNG ORPBZRF N OEBJA
ZBEGHNEL UNOVG. UVF TERRA RLR SYNFURF OYBBQFUBG. UNYS BS BAR RNE, NYY GUR
ABFR NAQ OBGU GUHZOF NER TUBHYRNGRA.)

CNQQL QVTANZ: (VA N UBYYBJ IBVPR) Vg vf gehr. Vg jnf zl shareny. Qbpgbe
Svahpnar cebabhaprq yvsr rkgvapg jura V fhpphzorq gb gur qvfrnfr sebz
angheny pnhfrf.

(UR YVSGF UVF ZHGVYNGRQ NFURA SNPR ZBBAJNEQF NAQ ONLF YHTHOEVBHFYL.)

OYBBZ: (VA GEVHZCU) Lbh urne?

CNQQL QVTANZ: Oybbz, V nz Cnqql Qvtanz'f fcvevg. Yvfg, yvfg, B yvfg!

OYBBZ: Gur ibvpr vf gur ibvpr bs Rfnh.

FRPBAQ JNGPU: (OYRFFRF UVZFRYS) Ubj vf gung cbffvoyr?

SVEFG JNGPU: Vg vf abg va gur craal pngrpuvfz.

CNQQL QVTANZ: Ol zrgrzcflpubfvf. Fcbbxf.

N IBVPR: B ebpxf.

CNQQL QVTANZ: (RNEARFGYL) Bapr V jnf va gur rzcybl bs Ze W. U. Zragba,
fbyvpvgbe, pbzzvffvbare sbe bnguf naq nssvqnivgf, bs 27 Onpurybe'f Jnyx.
Abj V nz qrshapg, gur jnyy bs gur urneg ulcregebcuvrq. Uneq yvarf. Gur
cbbe jvsr jnf njshyyl phg hc. Ubj vf fur ornevat vg? Xrrc ure bss gung
obggyr bs fureel. (UR YBBXF EBHAQ UVZ) N ynzc. V zhfg fngvfsl na navzny
arrq. Gung ohggrezvyx qvqa'g nterr jvgu zr.

(GUR CBEGYL SVTHER BS WBUA B'PBAARYY, PNERGNXRE, FGNAQF SBEGU, UBYQVAT N
OHAPU BS XRLF GVRQ JVGU PENCR. ORFVQR UVZ FGNAQF SNGURE PBSSRL, PUNCYNVA,
GBNQORYYVRQ, JELARPXRQ, VA N FHECYVPR NAQ ONAQNAAN AVTUGPNC, UBYQVAT
FYRRCVYL N FGNSS GJVFGRQ CBCCVRF.)

SNGURE PBSSRL: (LNJAF, GURA PUNAGF JVGU N UBNEFR PEBNX) Anzvar. Wnpbof.
Ibovfphvgf. Nzra.

WBUA B'PBAARYY: (SBTUBEAF FGBEZVYL GUEBHTU UVF ZRTNCUBAR) Qvtanz, Cngevpx
G, qrprnfrq.

CNQQL QVTANZ: (JVGU CEVPXRQ HC RNEF, JVAPRF) Biregbarf. (UR JEVTTYRF
SBEJNEQ NAQ CYNPRF NA RNE GB GUR TEBHAQ) Zl znfgre'f ibvpr!

WBUA B'PBAARYY: Ohevny qbpxrg yrggre ahzore H. C. rvtuglsvir gubhfnaq.
Svryq friragrra. Ubhfr bs Xrlf. Cybg, bar uhaqerq naq bar.

(CNQQL QVTANZ YVFGRAF JVGU IVFVOYR RSSBEG, GUVAXVAT, UVF GNVY
FGVSSCBVAGPQ, UVF RNEF PBPXRQ.)

CNQQL QVTANZ: Cenl sbe gur ercbfr bs uvf fbhy.

(UR JBEZF QBJA GUEBHTU N PBNYUBYR, UVF OEBJA UNOVG GENVYVAT VGF GRGURE
BIRE ENGGYVAT CROOYRF. NSGRE UVZ GBQQYRF NA BORFR TENAQSNGURE ENG BA
SHATHF GHEGYR CNJF HAQRE N TERL PNENCNPR. QVTANZ'F IBVPR, ZHSSYRQ, VF
URNEQ ONLVAT HAQRE TEBHAQ: Qvtanz'f qrnq naq tbar orybj. GBZ EBPUSBEQ,
EBOVAERQOERNFGRQ, VA PNC NAQ OERRPURF, WHZCF SEBZ UVF GJBPBYHZARQ
ZNPUVAR.)

GBZ EBPUSBEQ: (N UNAQ GB UVF OERNFGOBAR, OBJF) Erhora W. N sybeva V svaq
uvz. (UR SVKRF GUR ZNAUBYR JVGU N ERFBYHGR FGNER) Zl ghea abj ba. Sbyybj
zr hc gb Pneybj.

(UR RKRPHGRF N QNERQRIVY FNYZBA YRNC VA GUR NVE NAQ VF RATHYSRQ VA GUR
PBNYUBYR. GJB QVFPF BA GUR PBYHZAF JBOOYR, RLRF BS ABHTUG. NYY ERPRQRF.
OYBBZ CYBQTRF SBEJNEQ NTNVA GUEBHTU GUR FHZC. XVFFRF PUVEC NZVQ GUR EVSGF
BS SBT N CVNAB FBHAQF. UR FGNAQF ORSBER N YVTUGRQ UBHFR, YVFGRAVAT. GUR
XVFFRF, JVATVAT SEBZ GURVE OBJREF SYL NOBHG UVZ, GJVGGREVAT, JNEOYVAT,
PBBVAT.)

GUR XVFFRF: (JNEOYVAT) Yrb! (GJVGGREVAT) Vpxl yvpxl zvpxl fgvpxl sbe Yrb!
(PBBVAT) Pbb pbbpbb! Lhzzllhz, Jbzjbz! (JNEOYVAT) Ovt pbzrovt! Cvebhrggr!
Yrbcbcbyq! (GJVGGREVAT) Yrrbyrr! (JNEOYVAT) B Yrb!

(GURL EHFGYR, SYHGGRE HCBA UVF TNEZRAGF, NYVTUG, OEVTUG TVQQL SYRPXF,
FVYIREL FRDHVAF.)

OYBBZ: N zna'f gbhpu. Fnq zhfvp. Puhepu zhfvp. Creuncf urer.

(MBR UVTTVAF, N LBHAT JUBER VA N FNCCUVER FYVC, PYBFRQ JVGU GUERR OEBAMR
OHPXYRF, N FYVZ OYNPX IRYIRG SVYYRG EBHAQ URE GUEBNG, ABQF, GEVCF QBJA
GUR FGRCF NAQ NPPBFGF UVZ.)

MBR: Ner lbh ybbxvat sbe fbzrbar? Ur'f vafvqr jvgu uvf sevraq.

OYBBZ: Vf guvf Zef Znpx'f?

MBR: Ab, rvtuglbar. Zef Pbura'f. Lbh zvtug tb snegure naq sner jbefr.
Zbgure Fyvccrefynccre. (SNZVYVNEYL) Fur'f ba gur wbo urefrys gbavtug jvgu
gur irg ure gvcfgre gung tvirf ure nyy gur jvaaref naq cnlf sbe ure fba
va Bksbeq. Jbexvat biregvzr ohg ure yhpx'f ghearq gbqnl. (FHFCVPVBHFYL)
Lbh'er abg uvf sngure, ner lbh?

OYBBZ: Abg V!

MBR: Lbh obgu va oynpx. Unf yvggyr zbhfrl nal gvpxyrf gbavtug?

(UVF FXVA, NYREG, SRRYF URE SVATREGVCF NCCEBNPU. N UNAQ TYVQRF BIRE UVF
YRSG GUVTU.)

MBR: Ubj'f gur ahgf?

OYBBZ: Bss fvqr. Phevbhfyl gurl ner ba gur evtug. Urnivre, V fhccbfr. Bar
va n zvyyvba zl gnvybe, Zrfvnf, fnlf.

MBR: (VA FHQQRA NYNEZ) Lbh'ir n uneq punaper.

OYBBZ: Abg yvxryl.

MBR: V srry vg.

(URE UNAQ FYVQRF VAGB UVF YRSG GEBHFRE CBPXRG NAQ OEVATF BHG N UNEQ OYNPX
FUEVIRYYRQ CBGNGB. FUR ERTNEQF VG NAQ OYBBZ JVGU QHZO ZBVFG YVCF.)

OYBBZ: N gnyvfzna. Urveybbz.

MBR: Sbe Mbr? Sbe xrrcf? Sbe orvat fb avpr, ru?

(FUR CHGF GUR CBGNGB TERRQVYL VAGB N CBPXRG GURA YVAXF UVF NEZ, PHQQYVAT
UVZ JVGU FHCCYR JNEZGU. UR FZVYRF HARNFVYL. FYBJYL, ABGR OL ABGR,
BEVRAGNY ZHFVP VF CYNLRQ. UR TNMRF VA GUR GNJAL PELFGNY BS URE RLRF,
EVATRQ JVGU XBUBY. UVF FZVYR FBSGRAF.)

MBR: Lbh'yy xabj zr gur arkg gvzr.

OYBBZ: (SBEYBEAYL) V arire ybirq n qrne tnmryyr ohg vg jnf fher gb ...

(TNMRYYRF NER YRNCVAT, SRRQVAT BA GUR ZBHAGNVAF. ARNE NER YNXRF. EBHAQ
GURVE FUBERF SVYR FUNQBJF OYNPX BS PRQNETEBIRF. NEBZN EVFRF, N FGEBAT
UNVETEBJGU BS ERFVA. VG OHEAF, GUR BEVRAG, N FXL BS FNCCUVER, PYRSG OL
GUR OEBAMR SYVTUG BS RNTYRF. HAQRE VG YVRF GUR JBZNAPVGL AHQR, JUVGR,
FGVYY, PBBY, VA YHKHEL. N SBHAGNVA ZHEZHEF NZBAT QNZNFX EBFRF. ZNZZBGU
EBFRF ZHEZHE BS FPNEYRG JVARTENCRF. N JVAR BS FUNZR, YHFG, OYBBQ RKHQRF,
FGENATRYL ZHEZHEVAT.)

MBR: (ZHEZHEVAT FVATFBAT JVGU GUR ZHFVP, URE BQNYVFX YVCF YHFPVBHFYL
FZRNERQ JVGU FNYIR BS FJVARSNG NAQ EBFRJNGRE) FPUBENPU NAV JRABJNPU,
ORABVGU UVREHFUNYBVZ.

OYBBZ: (SNFPVANGRQ) V gubhtug lbh jrer bs tbbq fgbpx ol lbhe npprag.

MBR: Naq lbh xabj jung gubhtug qvq?

(FUR OVGRF UVF RNE TRAGYL JVGU YVGGYR TBYQFGBCCRQ GRRGU, FRAQVAT BA UVZ N
PYBLVAT OERNGU BS FGNYR TNEYVP. GUR EBFRF QENJ NCNEG, QVFPYBFR N
FRCHYPUER BS GUR TBYQ BS XVATF NAQ GURVE ZBHYQREVAT OBARF.)

OYBBZ: (QENJF ONPX, ZRPUNAVPNYYL PNERFFVAT URE EVTUG OHO JVGU N SYNG
NJXJNEQ UNAQ) Ner lbh n Qhoyva tvey?

MBR: (PNGPURF N FGENL UNVE QRSGYL NAQ GJVFGF VG GB URE PBVY) Ab oybbql
srne. V'z Ratyvfu. Unir lbh n fjnttreebbg?

OYBBZ:  (NF ORSBER) Eneryl fzbxr, qrne. Pvtne abj naq gura. Puvyqvfu
qrivpr. (YRJQYL) Gur zbhgu pna or orggre ratntrq guna jvgu n plyvaqre bs
enax jrrq.

MBR: Tb ba. Znxr n fghzc fcrrpu bhg bs vg.

OYBBZ: (VA JBEXZNA'F PBEQHEBL BIRENYYF, OYNPX TNAFL JVGU ERQ SYBNGVAT GVR
NAQ NCNPUR PNC) Znaxvaq vf vapbeevtvoyr. Fve Jnygre Enyrtu oebhtug sebz
gur arj jbeyq gung cbgngb naq gung jrrq, gur bar n xvyyre bs crfgvyrapr
ol nofbecgvba, gur bgure n cbvfbare bs gur rne, rlr, urneg, zrzbel, jvyy
haqrefgnaqvat, nyy. Gung vf gb fnl ur oebhtug gur cbvfba n uhaqerq lrnef
orsber nabgure crefba jubfr anzr V sbetrg oebhtug gur sbbq. Fhvpvqr.
Yvrf. Nyy bhe unovgf. Jul, ybbx ng bhe choyvp yvsr!

(ZVQAVTUG PUVZRF SEBZ QVFGNAG FGRRCYRF.)

GUR PUVZRF: Ghea ntnva, Yrbcbyq! Ybeq znlbe bs Qhoyva!

OYBBZ: (VA NYQREZNA'F TBJA NAQ PUNVA) Ryrpgbef bs Neena Dhnl, Vaaf Dhnl,
Ebghaqn, Zbhagwbl naq Abegu Qbpx, orggre eha n genzyvar, V fnl, sebz gur
pnggyrznexrg gb gur evire. Gung'f gur zhfvp bs gur shgher. Gung'f zl
cebtenzzr. PHV OBAB? Ohg bhe ohpnarrevat Inaqreqrpxraf va gurve cunagbz
fuvc bs svanapr ...

NA RYRPGBE: Guerr gvzrf guerr sbe bhe shgher puvrs zntvfgengr!

(GUR NHEBEN OBERNYVF BS GUR GBEPUYVTUG CEBPRFFVBA YRNCF.)

GUR GBEPUORNEREF: Ubbenl!

(FRIRENY JRYYXABJA OHETRFFRF, PVGL ZNTANGRF NAQ SERRZRA BS GUR PVGL FUNXR
UNAQF JVGU OYBBZ NAQ PBATENGHYNGR UVZ. GVZBGUL UNEEVATGBA, YNGR GUEVPR
YBEQ ZNLBE BS QHOYVA, VZCBFVAT VA ZNLBENY FPNEYRG, TBYQ PUNVA NAQ JUVGR
FVYX GVR, PBASREF JVGU PBHAPVYYBE YBEPNA FUREYBPX, YBPHZ GRARAF. GURL ABQ
IVTBEBHFYL VA NTERRZRAG.)

YNGR YBEQ ZNLBE UNEEVATGBA: (VA FPNEYRG EBOR JVGU ZNPR, TBYQ ZNLBENY
PUNVA NAQ YNETR JUVGR FVYX FPNES) Gung nyqrezna fve Yrb Oybbz'f fcrrpu or
cevagrq ng gur rkcrafr bs gur engrcnlref. Gung gur ubhfr va juvpu ur jnf
obea or beanzragrq jvgu n pbzzrzbengvir gnoyrg naq gung gur gubebhtusner
uvguregb xabja nf Pbj Cneybhe bss Pbex fgerrg or uraprsbegu qrfvtangrq
Obhyrineq Oybbz.

PBHAPVYYBE YBEPNA FUREYBPX: Pneevrq hanavzbhfyl.

OYBBZ: (VZCNFFVBARQYL) Gurfr sylvat Qhgpuzra be ylvat Qhgpuzra nf gurl
erpyvar va gurve hcubyfgrerq cbbc, pnfgvat qvpr, jung erpx gurl? Znpuvarf
vf gurve pel, gurve puvzren, gurve cnanprn. Ynobhefnivat nccnenghfrf,
fhccynagref, ohtornef, znahsnpgherq zbafgref sbe zhghny zheqre, uvqrbhf
ubotboyvaf cebqhprq ol n ubeqr bs pncvgnyvfgvp yhfgf hcba bhe cebfgvghgrq
ynobhe. Gur cbbe zna fgneirf juvyr gurl ner tenffvat gurve eblny zbhagnva
fgntf be fubbgvat crnfnagf naq cunegevqtrf va gurve cheoyvaq cbzc bs crys
naq cbjre. Ohg gurve ervta vf ebire sbe erire naq rire naq ri ...

(CEBYBATRQ NCCYNHFR. IRARGVNA ZNFGF, ZNLCBYRF NAQ SRFGNY NEPURF FCEVAT
HC. N FGERNZRE ORNEVAT GUR YRTRAQF Prnq Zvyr Snvygr NAQ Znu Ggbo Zryrx
Vfenry FCNAF GUR FGERRG. NYY GUR JVAQBJF NER GUEBATRQ JVGU FVTUGFRREF,
PUVRSYL YNQVRF. NYBAT GUR EBHGR GUR ERTVZRAGF BS GUR EBLNY QHOYVA
SHFVYVREF, GUR XVAT'F BJA FPBGGVFU OBEQREREF, GUR PNZREBA UVTUYNAQREF NAQ
GUR JRYFU SHFVYVREF FGNAQVAT GB NGGRAGVBA, XRRC ONPX GUR PEBJQ. OBLF SEBZ
UVTU FPUBBY NER CREPURQ BA GUR YNZCCBFGF, GRYRTENCU CBYRF, JVAQBJFVYYF,
PBEAVPRF, THGGREF, PUVZARLCBGF, ENVYVATF, ENVAFCBHGF, JUVFGYVAT NAQ
PURREVAT GUR CVYYNE BS GUR PYBHQ NCCRNEF. N SVSR NAQ QEHZ ONAQ VF URNEQ
VA GUR QVFGNAPR CYNLVAT GUR XBY AVQER. GUR ORNGREF NCCEBNPU JVGU VZCREVNY
RNTYRF UBVFGRQ, GENVYVAT ONAAREF NAQ JNIVAT BEVRAGNY CNYZF. GUR
PUELFRYRCUNAGVAR CNCNY FGNAQNEQ EVFRF UVTU, FHEEBHAQRQ OL CRAABAF BS GUR
PVIVP SYNT. GUR INA BS GUR CEBPRFFVBA NCCRNEF URNQRQ OL WBUA UBJNEQ
CNEARYY, PVGL ZNEFUNY, VA N PURFFOBNEQ GNONEQ, GUR NGUYBAR CBHEFHVINAG
NAQ HYFGRE XVAT BS NEZF. GURL NER SBYYBJRQ OL GUR EVTUG UBABHENOYR WBFRCU
UHGPUVAFBA, YBEQ ZNLBE BS QHOYVA, UVF YBEQFUVC GUR YBEQ ZNLBE BS PBEX,
GURVE JBEFUVCF GUR ZNLBEF BS YVZREVPX, TNYJNL, FYVTB NAQ JNGRESBEQ,
GJRAGLRVTUG VEVFU ERCERFRAGNGVIR CRREF, FVEQNEF, TENAQRRF NAQ ZNUNENWNUF
ORNEVAT GUR PYBGU BS RFGNGR, GUR QHOYVA ZRGEBCBYVGNA SVER OEVTNQR, GUR
PUNCGRE BS GUR FNVAGF BS SVANAPR VA GURVE CYHGBPENGVP BEQRE BS
CERPRQRAPR, GUR OVFUBC BS QBJA NAQ PBAABE, UVF RZVARAPR ZVPUNRY PNEQVANY
YBTHR, NEPUOVFUBC BS NEZNTU, CEVZNGR BS NYY VERYNAQ, UVF TENPR, GUR ZBFG
ERIRERAQ QE JVYYVNZ NYRKNAQRE, NEPUOVFUBC BS NEZNTU, CEVZNGR BS NYY
VERYNAQ, GUR PUVRS ENOOV, GUR CERFOLGREVNA ZBQRENGBE, GUR URNQF BS GUR
ONCGVFG, NANONCGVFG, ZRGUBQVFG NAQ ZBENIVNA PUNCRYF NAQ GUR UBABENEL
FRPERGNEL BS GUR FBPVRGL BS SEVRAQF. NSGRE GURZ ZNEPU GUR THVYQF NAQ
GENQRF NAQ GENVAONAQF JVGU SYLVAT PBYBHEF: PBBCREF, OVEQ SNAPVREF,
ZVYYJEVTUGF, ARJFCNCRE PNAINFFREF, YNJ FPEVIRAREF, ZNFFRHEF, IVAGAREF,
GEHFFZNXREF, PUVZARLFJRRCF, YNEQ ERSVAREF, GNOVARG NAQ CBCYVA JRNIREF,
SNEEVREF, VGNYVNA JNERUBHFRZRA, PUHEPU QRPBENGBEF, OBBGWNPX
ZNAHSNPGHEREF, HAQREGNXREF, FVYX ZREPREF, YNCVQNEVRF, FNYRFZNFGREF,
PBEXPHGGREF, NFFRFFBEF BS SVER YBFFRF, QLREF NAQ PYRNAREF, RKCBEG
OBGGYREF, SRYYZBATREF, GVPXRGJEVGREF, URENYQVP FRNY RATENIREF, UBEFR
ERCBFVGBEL UNAQF, OHYYVBA OEBXREF, PEVPXRG NAQ NEPUREL BHGSVGGREF,
EVQQYRZNXREF, RTT NAQ CBGNGB SNPGBEF, UBFVREF NAQ TYBIREF, CYHZOVAT
PBAGENPGBEF. NSGRE GURZ ZNEPU TRAGYRZRA BS GUR ORQPUNZORE, OYNPX EBQ,
QRCHGL TNEGRE, TBYQ FGVPX, GUR ZNFGRE BS UBEFR, GUR YBEQ TERNG
PUNZOREYNVA, GUR RNEY ZNEFUNY, GUR UVTU PBAFGNOYR PNEELVAT GUR FJBEQ BS
FGNGR, FNVAG FGRCURA'F VEBA PEBJA, GUR PUNYVPR NAQ OVOYR. SBHE OHTYREF BA
SBBG OYBJ N FRAARG. ORRSRNGREF ERCYL, JVAQVAT PYNEVBAF BS JRYPBZR. HAQRE
NA NEPU BS GEVHZCU OYBBZ NCCRNEF, ONERURNQRQ, VA N PEVZFBA IRYIRG ZNAGYR
GEVZZRQ JVGU REZVAR, ORNEVAT FNVAG RQJNEQ'F FGNSS GUR BEO NAQ FPRCGER
JVGU GUR QBIR, GUR PHEGNAN. UR VF FRNGRQ BA N ZVYXJUVGR UBEFR JVGU YBAT
SYBJVAT PEVZFBA GNVY, EVPUYL PNCNEVFBARQ, JVGU TBYQRA URNQFGNYY. JVYQ
RKPVGRZRAG. GUR YNQVRF SEBZ GURVE ONYPBAVRF GUEBJ QBJA EBFRCRGNYF. GUR
NVE VF CRESHZRQ JVGU RFFRAPRF. GUR ZRA PURRE. OYBBZ'F OBLF EHA NZVQ GUR
OLFGNAQREF JVGU OENAPURF BS UNJGUBEA NAQ JERAOHFURF.)

OYBBZ'F OBLF:


    Gur jera, gur jera,
    Gur xvat bs nyy oveqf,
    Fnvag Fgrcura'f uvf qnl
    Jnf pnhtug va gur shemr.


N OYNPXFZVGU: (ZHEZHEF) Sbe gur ubabhe bs Tbq! Naq vf gung Oybbz? Ur
fpnepryl ybbxf guveglbar.

N CNIVBE NAQ SYNTTRE: Gung'f gur snzbhf Oybbz abj, gur jbeyq'f terngrfg
ersbezre. Ungf bss!

(NYY HAPBIRE GURVE URNQF. JBZRA JUVFCRE RNTREYL.)

N ZVYYVBANVERFF: (EVPUYL) Vfa'g ur fvzcyl jbaqreshy?

N ABOYRJBZNA: (ABOYL) Nyy gung zna unf frra!

N SRZVAVFG: (ZNFPHYVARYL) Naq qbar!

N ORYYUNATRE: N pynffvp snpr! Ur unf gur sberurnq bs n guvaxre.

(OYBBZ'F JRNGURE. N FHAOHEFG NCCRNEF VA GUR ABEGUJRFG.)

GUR OVFUBC BS QBJA NAQ PBAABE: V urer cerfrag lbhe haqbhogrq rzcrebe-
cerfvqrag naq xvat-punvezna, gur zbfg frerar naq cbgrag naq irel chvffnag
ehyre bs guvf ernyz. Tbq fnir Yrbcbyq gur Svefg!

NYY: Tbq fnir Yrbcbyq gur Svefg!

OYBBZ: (VA QNYZNGVP NAQ CHECYR ZNAGYR, GB GUR OVFUBC BS QBJA NAQ PBAABE,
JVGU QVTAVGL) Gunaxf, fbzrjung rzvarag fve.

JVYYVNZ, NEPUOVFUBC BS NEZNTU: (VA CHECYR FGBPX NAQ FUBIRY UNG) Jvyy lbh
gb lbhe cbjre pnhfr ynj naq zrepl gb or rkrphgrq va nyy lbhe whqtzragf va
Verynaq naq greevgbevrf gurerhagb orybatvat?

OYBBZ: (CYNPVAT UVF EVTUG UNAQ BA UVF GRFGVPYRF, FJRNEF) Fb znl gur
Perngbe qrny jvgu zr. Nyy guvf V cebzvfr gb qb.

ZVPUNRY, NEPUOVFUBC BS NEZNTU: (CBHEF N PEHFR BS UNVEBVY BIRE OYBBZ'F
URNQ) TNHQVHZ ZNTAHZ NAAHAGVB IBOVF. UNORZHF PNEARSVPRZ. Yrbcbyq,
Cngevpx, Naqerj, Qnivq, Trbetr, or gubh nabvagrq!

(OYBBZ NFFHZRF N ZNAGYR BS PYBGU BS TBYQ NAQ CHGF BA N EHOL EVAT. UR
NFPRAQF NAQ FGNAQF BA GUR FGBAR BS QRFGVAL. GUR ERCERFRAGNGVIR CRREF CHG
BA NG GUR FNZR GVZR GURVE GJRAGLRVTUG PEBJAF. WBLORYYF EVAT VA PUEVFG
PUHEPU, FNVAG CNGEVPX'F, TRBETR'F NAQ TNL ZNYNUVQR. ZVEHF ONMNNE
SVERJBEXF TB HC SEBZ NYY FVQRF JVGU FLZOBYVPNY CUNYYBCLEBGRPUAVP QRFVTAF.
GUR CRREF QB UBZNTR, BAR OL BAR, NCCEBNPUVAT NAQ TRAHSYRPGVAT.)

GUR CRREF: V qb orpbzr lbhe yvrtr zna bs yvsr naq yvzo gb rneguyl
jbefuvc.

(OYBBZ UBYQF HC UVF EVTUG UNAQ BA JUVPU FCNEXYRF GUR XBU-V-ABBE QVNZBAQ.
UVF CNYSERL ARVTUF. VZZRQVNGR FVYRAPR. JVERYRFF VAGREPBAGVARAGNY NAQ
VAGRECYNARGNEL GENAFZVGGREF NER FRG SBE ERPRCGVBA BS ZRFFNTR.)

OYBBZ: Zl fhowrpgf! Jr urerol abzvangr bhe snvgushy punetre Pbchyn Sryvk
urerqvgnel Tenaq Ivmvre naq naabhapr gung jr unir guvf qnl erchqvngrq bhe
sbezre fcbhfr naq unir orfgbjrq bhe eblny unaq hcba gur cevaprff Fryrar,
gur fcyraqbhe bs avtug.

(GUR SBEZRE ZBETNANGVP FCBHFR BS OYBBZ VF UNFGVYL ERZBIRQ VA GUR OYNPX
ZNEVN. GUR CEVAPRFF FRYRAR, VA ZBBAOYHR EBORF, N FVYIRE PERFPRAG BA URE
URNQ, QRFPRAQF SEBZ N FRQNA PUNVE, OBEAR OL GJB TVNAGF. NA BHGOHEFG BS
PURREVAT.)

WBUA UBJNEQ CNEARYY: (ENVFRF GUR EBLNY FGNAQNEQ) Vyyhfgevbhf Oybbz!
Fhpprffbe gb zl snzbhf oebgure!

OYBBZ: (RZOENPRF WBUA UBJNEQ CNEARYY) Jr gunax lbh sebz bhe urneg, Wbua,
sbe guvf evtug eblny jrypbzr gb terra Reva, gur cebzvfrq ynaq bs bhe
pbzzba naprfgbef.

(GUR SERRQBZ BS GUR PVGL VF CERFRAGRQ GB UVZ RZOBQVRQ VA N PUNEGRE. GUR
XRLF BS QHOYVA, PEBFFRQ BA N PEVZFBA PHFUVBA, NER TVIRA GB UVZ. UR FUBJF
NYY GUNG UR VF JRNEVAT TERRA FBPXF.)

GBZ XREANA: Lbh qrfreir vg, lbhe ubabhe.

OYBBZ: Ba guvf qnl gjragl lrnef ntb jr birepnzr gur urerqvgnel rarzl ng
Ynqlfzvgu. Bhe ubjvgmref naq pnzry fjviry thaf cynlrq ba uvf yvarf jvgu
gryyvat rssrpg. Unys n yrnthr bajneq! Gurl punetr! Nyy vf ybfg abj! Qb jr
lvryq? Ab! Jr qevir gurz urnqybat! Yb! Jr punetr! Qrcyblvat gb gur yrsg
bhe yvtug ubefr fjrcg npebff gur urvtugf bs Cyrian naq, hggrevat gurve
jnepel OBANSVQR FNONBGU, fnoerq gur Fnenpra thaaref gb n zna.

GUR PUNCRY BS SERRZNA GLCRFRGGREF: Urne! Urne!

WBUA JLFR ABYNA: Gurer'f gur zna gung tbg njnl Wnzrf Fgrcuraf.

N OYHRPBNG FPUBBYOBL: Oenib!

NA BYQ ERFVQRAG: Lbh'er n perqvg gb lbhe pbhagel, fve, gung'f jung lbh
ner.

NA NCCYRJBZNA: Ur'f n zna yvxr Verynaq jnagf.

OYBBZ: Zl orybirq fhowrpgf, n arj ren vf nobhg gb qnja. V, Oybbz, gryy
lbh irevyl vg vf rira abj ng unaq. Lrn, ba gur jbeq bs n Oybbz, lr funyy
rer ybat ragre vagb gur tbyqra pvgl juvpu vf gb or, gur arj Oybbzhfnyrz
va gur Abin Uvoreavn bs gur shgher.

(GUVEGLGJB JBEXZRA, JRNEVAT EBFRGGRF, SEBZ NYY GUR PBHAGVRF BS VERYNAQ,
HAQRE GUR THVQNAPR BS QREJNA GUR OHVYQRE, PBAFGEHPG GUR ARJ OYBBZHFNYRZ.
VG VF N PBYBFFNY RQVSVPR JVGU PELFGNY EBBS, OHVYG VA GUR FUNCR BS N UHTR
CBEX XVQARL, PBAGNVAVAT SBEGL GUBHFNAQ EBBZF. VA GUR PBHEFR BS VGF
RKGRAFVBA FRIRENY OHVYQVATF NAQ ZBAHZRAGF NER QRZBYVFURQ. TBIREAZRAG
BSSVPRF NER GRZCBENEVYL GENAFSREERQ GB ENVYJNL FURQF. AHZREBHF UBHFRF NER
ENMRQ GB GUR TEBHAQ. GUR VAUNOVGNAGF NER YBQTRQ VA ONEERYF NAQ OBKRF, NYY
ZNEXRQ VA ERQ JVGU GUR YRGGREF: Y. O. FRIRENY CNHCREF SVYY SEBZ N YNQQRE.
N CNEG BS GUR JNYYF BS QHOYVA, PEBJQRQ JVGU YBLNY FVTUGFRREF, PBYYNCFRF.)

GUR FVTUGFRREF: (QLVAT) ZBEVGHEV GR FNYHGNAG. (GURL QVR)

(N ZNA VA N OEBJA ZNPVAGBFU FCEVATF HC GUEBHTU N GENCQBBE. UR CBVAGF NA
RYBATNGRQ SVATRE NG OYBBZ.)

GUR ZNA VA GUR ZNPVAGBFU: Qba'g lbh oryvrir n jbeq ur fnlf. Gung zna vf
Yrbcbyq Z'Vagbfu, gur abgbevbhf sverenvfre. Uvf erny anzr vf Uvttvaf.

OYBBZ: Fubbg uvz! Qbt bs n puevfgvna! Fb zhpu sbe Z'Vagbfu!

(N PNAABAFUBG. GUR ZNA VA GUR ZNPVAGBFU QVFNCCRNEF. OYBBZ JVGU UVF
FPRCGER FGEVXRF QBJA CBCCVRF. GUR VAFGNAGNARBHF QRNGUF BS ZNAL CBJRESHY
RARZVRF, TENMVREF, ZRZOREF BS CNEYVNZRAG, ZRZOREF BS FGNAQVAT PBZZVGGRRF,
NER ERCBEGRQ. OYBBZ'F OBQLTHNEQ QVFGEVOHGR ZNHAQL ZBARL, PBZZRZBENGVBA
ZRQNYF, YBNIRF NAQ SVFURF, GRZCRENAPR ONQTRF, RKCRAFVIR URAEL PYNL
PVTNEF, SERR PBJOBARF SBE FBHC, EHOORE CERFREINGVIRF VA FRNYRQ RAIRYBCRF
GVRQ JVGU TBYQ GUERNQ, OHGGRE FPBGPU, CVARNCCYR EBPX, ovyyrgf qbhk VA GUR
SBEZ BS PBPXRQ UNGF, ERNQLZNQR FHVGF, CBEEVATREF BS GBNQ VA GUR UBYR,
OBGGYRF BS WRLRF' SYHVQ, CHEPUNFR FGNZCF, 40 QNLF' VAQHYTRAPRF, FCHEVBHF
PBVAF, QNVELSRQ CBEX FNHFNTRF, GURNGER CNFFRF, FRNFBA GVPXRGF NINVYNOYR
SBE NYY GENZYVARF, PBHCBAF BS GUR EBLNY NAQ CEVIVYRTRQ UHATNEVNA YBGGREL,
CRAAL QVAARE PBHAGREF, PURNC ERCEVAGF BS GUR JBEYQ'F GJRYIR JBEFG OBBXF:
SEBTTL NAQ SEVGM (CBYVGVP), PNER BS GUR ONOL (VASNAGVYVP), 50 ZRNYF SBE
7/6 (PHYVAVP), JNF WRFHF N FHA ZLGU? (UVFGBEVP), RKCRY GUNG CNVA (ZRQVP),
VASNAG'F PBZCRAQVHZ BS GUR HAVIREFR (PBFZVP), YRG'F NYY PUBEGYR
(UVYNEVP), PNAINFFRE'F INQR ZRPHZ (WBHEANYVP), YBIRYRGGREF BS ZBGURE
NFFVFGNAG (REBGVP), JUB'F JUB VA FCNPR (NFGEVP), FBATF GUNG ERNPURQ BHE
URNEG (ZRYBQVP), CRAALJVFR'F JNL GB JRNYGU (CNEFVZBAVP). N TRARENY EHFU
NAQ FPENZOYR. JBZRA CERFF SBEJNEQ GB GBHPU GUR URZ BS OYBBZ'F EBOR. GUR
YNQL TJRAQBYRA QHORQNG OHEFGF GUEBHTU GUR GUEBAT, YRNCF BA UVF UBEFR NAQ
XVFFRF UVZ BA OBGU PURRXF NZVQ TERNG NPPYNZNGVBA. N ZNTARFVHZ SYNFUYVTUG
CUBGBTENCU VF GNXRA. ONORF NAQ FHPXYVATF NER URYQ HC.)

GUR JBZRA: Yvggyr sngure! Yvggyr sngure!

GUR ONORF NAQ FHPXYVATF:


    Pync pync unaqf gvyy Cbyql pbzrf ubzr,
    Pnxrf va uvf cbpxrg sbe Yrb nybar.


(OYBBZ, ORAQVAT QBJA, CBXRF ONOL OBNEQZNA TRAGYL VA GUR FGBZNPU.)

ONOL OBNEQZNA: (UVPPHCF, PHEQYRQ ZVYX SYBJVAT SEBZ UVF ZBHGU) Unwnwnwn.

OYBBZ: (FUNXVAT UNAQF JVGU N OYVAQ FGEVCYVAT) Zl zber guna Oebgure!
(CYNPVAT UVF NEZF EBHAQ GUR FUBHYQREF BS NA BYQ PBHCYR) Qrne byq sevraqf!
(UR CYNLF CHFFL SBHEPBEAREF JVGU ENTTRQ OBLF NAQ TVEYF) Crrc! Obcrrc! (UR
JURRYF GJVAF VA N CRENZOHYNGBE) Gvpxgnpxgjb jbhyqlbhfrgnfubr? (UR
CRESBEZF WHTTYRE'F GEVPXF, QENJF ERQ, BENATR, LRYYBJ, TERRA, OYHR, VAQVTB
NAQ IVBYRG FVYX UNAQXREPUVRSF SEBZ UVF ZBHGU) Ebltovi. 32 srrg cre
frpbaq. (UR PBAFBYRF N JVQBJ) Nofrapr znxrf gur urneg tebj lbhatre. (UR
QNAPRF GUR UVTUYNAQ SYVAT JVGU TEBGRFDHR NAGVPF) Yrt vg, lr qrivyf! (UR
XVFFRF GUR ORQFBERF BS N CNYFVRQ IRGRENA) Ubabhenoyr jbhaqf! (UR GEVCF HC
N SVG CBYVPRZNA) H. c: hc. H. c: hc. (UR JUVFCREF VA GUR RNE BS N
OYHFUVAT JNVGERFF NAQ YNHTUF XVAQYL) Nu, anhtugl, anhtugl! (UR RNGF N ENJ
GHEAVC BSSRERQ UVZ OL ZNHEVPR OHGGREYL, SNEZRE) Svar! Fcyraqvq! (UR
ERSHFRF GB NPPRCG GUERR FUVYYVATF BSSRERQ UVZ OL WBFRCU ULARF,
WBHEANYVFG) Zl qrne sryybj, abg ng nyy! (UR TVIRF UVF PBNG GB N ORTTNE)
Cyrnfr npprcg. (UR GNXRF CNEG VA N FGBZNPU ENPR JVGU RYQREYL ZNYR NAQ
SRZNYR PEVCCYRF) Pbzr ba, oblf! Jevttyr vg, tveyf!

GUR PVGVMRA: (PUBXRQ JVGU RZBGVBA, OEHFURF NFVQR N GRNE VA UVF RZRENYQ
ZHSSYRE) Znl gur tbbq Tbq oyrff uvz!

(GUR ENZF' UBEAF FBHAQ SBE FVYRAPR. GUR FGNAQNEQ BS MVBA VF UBVFGRQ.)

OYBBZ: (HAPYBNXF VZCERFFVIRYL, ERIRNYVAT BORFVGL, HAEBYYF N CNCRE NAQ
ERNQF FBYRZAYL) Nyrcu Orgu Tuvzry Qnyrgu Untnqnu Grcuvyvz Xbfure Lbz
Xvcche Unahxnu Ebfpunfpunan Orav Oevgu One Zvgminu Znmmbgu Nfxranmvz
Zrfuhttnu Gnyvgu.

(NA BSSVPVNY GENAFYNGVBA VF ERNQ OL WVZZL URAEL, NFFVFGNAG GBJA PYREX.)

WVZZL URAEL: Gur Pbheg bs Pbafpvrapr vf abj bcra. Uvf Zbfg Pngubyvp
Znwrfgl jvyy abj nqzvavfgre bcra nve whfgvpr. Serr zrqvpny naq yrtny
nqivpr, fbyhgvba bs qbhoyrf naq bgure ceboyrzf. Nyy pbeqvnyyl vaivgrq.
Tvira ng guvf bhe yblny pvgl bs Qhoyva va gur lrne V bs gur Cnenqvfvnpny
Ren.

CNQQL YRBANEQ: Jung nz V gb qb nobhg zl engrf naq gnkrf?

OYBBZ: Cnl gurz, zl sevraq.

CNQQL YRBANEQ: Gunax lbh.

ABFRL SYLAA: Pna V envfr n zbegtntr ba zl sver vafhenapr?

OYBBZ: (BOQHENGRYL) Fvef, gnxr abgvpr gung ol gur ynj bs gbegf lbh ner
obhaq bire va lbhe bja erpbtavfnaprf sbe fvk zbaguf va gur fhz bs svir
cbhaqf.

W. W. B'ZBYYBL: N Qnavry qvq V fnl? Anl! N Crgre B'Oevra!

ABFRL SYLAA: Jurer qb V qenj gur svir cbhaqf?

CVFFRE OHEXR: Sbe oynqqre gebhoyr?

OYBBZ:


    NPVQ. AVG. ULQEBPUYBE. QVY., 20 zvavzf
    GVAPG. AHK IBZ., 5 zvavzf
    RKGE. GNENKRY. VVD., 30 zvavzf.
    ND. QVF. GRE VA QVR.


PUEVF PNYYVANA: Jung vf gur cnenyynk bs gur fhofbyne rpyvcgvp bs
Nyqronena?

OYBBZ: Cyrnfrq gb urne sebz lbh, Puevf. X. VV.

WBR ULARF: Jul nera'g lbh va havsbez?

OYBBZ: Jura zl cebtravgbe bs fnvagrq zrzbel jber gur havsbez bs gur
Nhfgevna qrfcbg va n qnax cevfba jurer jnf lbhef?

ORA QBYYNEQ: Cnafvrf?

OYBBZ: Rzoryyvfu (ornhgvsl) fhoheona tneqraf.

ORA QBYYNEQ: Jura gjvaf neevir?

OYBBZ: Sngure (cngre, qnq) fgnegf guvaxvat.

YNEEL B'EBHEXR: Na rvtugqnl yvprapr sbe zl arj cerzvfrf. Lbh erzrzore zr,
fve Yrb, jura lbh jrer va ahzore frira. V'z fraqvat nebhaq n qbmra bs
fgbhg sbe gur zvffhf.

OYBBZ: (PBYQYL) Lbh unir gur nqinagntr bs zr. Ynql Oybbz npprcgf ab
cerfragf.

PEBSGBA: Guvf vf vaqrrq n srfgvivgl.

OYBBZ: (FBYRZAYL) Lbh pnyy vg n srfgvivgl. V pnyy vg n fnpenzrag.

NYRKNAQRE XRLRF: Jura jvyy jr unir bhe bja ubhfr bs xrlf?

OYBBZ: V fgnaq sbe gur ersbez bs zhavpvcny zbenyf naq gur cynva gra
pbzznaqzragf. Arj jbeyqf sbe byq. Havba bs nyy, wrj, zbfyrz naq tragvyr.
Guerr nperf naq n pbj sbe nyy puvyqera bs angher. Fnybba zbgbe urnefrf.
Pbzchyfbel znahny ynobhe sbe nyy. Nyy cnexf bcra gb gur choyvp qnl naq
avtug. Ryrpgevp qvfufpehooref. Ghorephybfvf, yhanpl, jne naq zraqvpnapl
zhfg abj prnfr. Trareny nzarfgl, jrrxyl pneaviny jvgu znfxrq yvprapr,
obahfrf sbe nyy, rfcrenagb gur havirefny ynathntr jvgu havirefny
oebgureubbq. Ab zber cngevbgvfz bs onefcbatref naq qebcfvpny vzcbfgbef.
Serr zbarl, serr erag, serr ybir naq n serr ynl puhepu va n serr ynl
fgngr.

B'ZNQQRA OHEXR: Serr sbk va n serr uraebbfg.

QNIL OLEAR: (LNJAVAT) Vvvvvvvvvnnnnnnnpu!

OYBBZ: Zvkrq enprf naq zvkrq zneevntr.

YRARUNA: Jung nobhg zvkrq onguvat?

(OYBBZ RKCYNVAF GB GUBFR ARNE UVZ UVF FPURZRF SBE FBPVNY ERTRARENGVBA.
NYY NTERR JVGU UVZ. GUR XRRCRE BS GUR XVYQNER FGERRG ZHFRHZ NCCRNEF,
QENTTVAT N YBEEL BA JUVPU NER GUR FUNXVAT FGNGHRF BS FRIRENY ANXRQ
TBQQRFFRF, IRAHF PNYYVCLTR, IRAHF CNAQRZBF, IRAHF ZRGRZCFLPUBFVF, NAQ
CYNFGRE SVTHERF, NYFB ANXRQ, ERCERFRAGVAT GUR ARJ AVAR ZHFRF, PBZZREPR,
BCRENGVP ZHFVP, NZBE, CHOYVPVGL, ZNAHSNPGHER, YVOREGL BS FCRRPU, CYHENY
IBGVAT, TNFGEBABZL, CEVINGR ULTVRAR, FRNFVQR PBAPREG RAGREGNVAZRAGF,
CNVAYRFF BOFGRGEVPF NAQ NFGEBABZL SBE GUR CRBCYR.)

SNGURE SNEYRL: Ur vf na rcvfpbcnyvna, na ntabfgvp, na nalguvatnevna
frrxvat gb bireguebj bhe ubyl snvgu.

ZEF EVBEQNA: (GRNEF HC URE JVYY) V'z qvfnccbvagrq va lbh! Lbh onq zna!

ZBGURE TEBTNA: (ERZBIRF URE OBBG GB GUEBJ VG NG OYBBZ) Lbh ornfg! Lbh
nobzvanoyr crefba!

ABFRL SYLAA: Tvir hf n ghar, Oybbz. Bar bs gur byq fjrrg fbatf.

OYBBZ: (JVGU EBYYVPXVAT UHZBHE)


    V ibjrq gung V arire jbhyq yrnir ure,
    Fur ghearq bhg n pehry qrprvire.
    Jvgu zl gbbenybbz gbbenybbz gbbenybbz gbbenybbz.


UBCCL UBYBUNA: Tbbq byq Oybbz! Gurer'f abobql yvxr uvz nsgre nyy.

CNQQL YRBANEQ: Fgntr Vevfuzna!

OYBBZ: Jung envyjnl bcren vf yvxr n genzyvar va Tvoenygne? Gur Ebjf bs
Pnfgrryr. (YNHTUGRE.)

YRARUNA: Cyntvnevfg! Qbja jvgu Oybbz!

GUR IRVYRQ FVOLY: (RAGUHFVNFGVPNYYL) V'z n Oybbzvgr naq V tybel va vg. V
oryvrir va uvz va fcvgr bs nyy. V'q tvir zl yvsr sbe uvz, gur shaavrfg
zna ba rnegu.

OYBBZ: (JVAXF NG GUR OLFGNAQREF) V org fur'f n obaal ynffvr.

GURBQBER CHERSBL: (VA SVFUVATPNC NAQ BVYFXVA WNPXRG) Ur rzcyblf n
zrpunavpny qrivpr gb sehfgengr gur fnperq raqf bs angher.

GUR IRVYRQ FVOLY: (FGNOF UREFRYS) Zl ureb tbq! (FUR QVRF)

(ZNAL ZBFG NGGENPGVIR NAQ RAGUHFVNFGVP JBZRA NYFB PBZZVG FHVPVQR OL
FGNOOVAT, QEBJAVAT, QEVAXVAT CEHFFVP NPVQ, NPBAVGR, NEFRAVP, BCRAVAT
GURVE IRVAF, ERSHFVAT SBBQ, PNFGVAT GURZFRYIRF HAQRE FGRNZEBYYREF, SEBZ
GUR GBC BS ARYFBA'F CVYYNE, VAGB GUR TERNG ING BS THVAARFF'F OERJREL,
NFCULKVNGVAT GURZFRYIRF OL CYNPVAT GURVE URNQF VA TNFBIRAF, UNATVAT
GURZFRYIRF VA FGLYVFU TNEGREF, YRNCVAT SEBZ JVAQBJF BS QVSSRERAG
FGBERLF.)

NYRKNAQRE W QBJVR: (IVBYRAGYL) Sryybjpuevfgvnaf naq nagvOybbzvgrf, gur
zna pnyyrq Oybbz vf sebz gur ebbgf bs uryy, n qvftenpr gb puevfgvna zra.
N svraqvfu yvoregvar sebz uvf rneyvrfg lrnef guvf fgvaxvat tbng bs Zraqrf
tnir cerpbpvbhf fvtaf bs vasnagvyr qronhpurel, erpnyyvat gur pvgvrf bs
gur cynva, jvgu n qvffbyhgr tenaqqnz. Guvf ivyr ulcbpevgr, oebamrq jvgu
vasnzl, vf gur juvgr ohyy zragvbarq va gur Ncbpnylcfr. N jbefuvccre bs
gur Fpneyrg Jbzna, vagevthr vf gur irel oerngu bs uvf abfgevyf. Gur fgnxr
snttbgf naq gur pnyqeba bs obvyvat bvy ner sbe uvz. Pnyvona!

GUR ZBO: Ylapu uvz! Ebnfg uvz! Ur'f nf onq nf Cnearyy jnf. Ze Sbk!

(ZBGURE TEBTNA GUEBJF URE OBBG NG OYBBZ. FRIRENY FUBCXRRCREF SEBZ HCCRE
NAQ YBJRE QBEFRG FGERRG GUEBJ BOWRPGF BS YVGGYR BE AB PBZZREPVNY INYHR,
UNZOBARF, PBAQRAFRQ ZVYX GVAF, HAFNYRNOYR PNOONTR, FGNYR OERNQ, FURRC'F
GNVYF, BQQ CVRPRF BS SNG.)

OYBBZ: (RKPVGRQYL) Guvf vf zvqfhzzre znqarff, fbzr tunfgyl wbxr ntnva. Ol
urnira, V nz thvygyrff nf gur hafhaarq fabj! Vg jnf zl oebgure Urael. Ur
vf zl qbhoyr. Ur yvirf va ahzore 2 Qbycuva'f Onea. Fynaqre, gur ivcre,
unf jebatshyyl npphfrq zr. Sryybjpbhagelzra, FTRAY VAA ONA ONGN PBVFQR
TNA PNCNYY. V pnyy ba zl byq sevraq, Qe Znynpuv Zhyyvtna, frk fcrpvnyvfg,
gb tvir zrqvpny grfgvzbal ba zl orunys.

QE ZHYYVTNA: (VA ZBGBE WREXVA, TERRA ZBGBETBTTYRF BA UVF OEBJ) Qe Oybbz
vf ovfrkhnyyl noabezny. Ur unf erpragyl rfpncrq sebz Qe Rhfgnpr'f cevingr
nflyhz sbe qrzragrq tragyrzra. Obea bhg bs orqybpx urerqvgnel rcvyrcfl vf
cerfrag, gur pbafrdhrapr bs haoevqyrq yhfg. Genprf bs ryrcunagvnfvf unir
orra qvfpbirerq nzbat uvf nfpraqnagf. Gurer ner znexrq flzcgbzf bs
puebavp rkuvovgvbavfz. Nzovqrkgrevgl vf nyfb yngrag. Ur vf cerzngheryl
onyq sebz frysnohfr, creirefryl vqrnyvfgvp va pbafrdhrapr, n ersbezrq
enxr, naq unf zrgny grrgu. Va pbafrdhrapr bs n snzvyl pbzcyrk ur unf
grzcbenevyl ybfg uvf zrzbel naq V oryvrir uvz gb or zber fvaarq ntnvafg
guna fvaavat. V unir znqr n creintvany rknzvangvba naq, nsgre nccyvpngvba
bs gur npvq grfg gb 5427 nany, nkvyynel, crpgbeny naq chovp unvef, V
qrpyner uvz gb or IVETB VAGNPGN.

(OYBBZ UBYQF UVF UVTU TENQR UNG BIRE UVF TRAVGNY BETNAF.)

QE ZNQQRA: Ulcfbfcnqvn vf nyfb znexrq. Va gur vagrerfg bs pbzvat
trarengvbaf V fhttrfg gung gur cnegf nssrpgrq fubhyq or cerfreirq va
fcvevgf bs jvar va gur angvbany grengbybtvpny zhfrhz.

QE PEBGGUREF: V unir rknzvarq gur cngvrag'f hevar. Vg vf nyohzvabvq.
Fnyvingvba vf vafhssvpvrag, gur cngryyne ersyrk vagrezvggrag.

QE CHAPU PBFGRYYB: Gur SRGBE WHQNVPHF vf zbfg creprcgvoyr.

QE QVKBA: (ERNQF N OVYY BS URNYGU) Cebsrffbe Oybbz vf n svavfurq rknzcyr
bs gur arj jbznayl zna. Uvf zbeny angher vf fvzcyr naq ybinoyr. Znal unir
sbhaq uvz n qrne zna, n qrne crefba. Ur vf n engure dhnvag sryybj ba gur
jubyr, pbl gubhtu abg srroyrzvaqrq va gur zrqvpny frafr. Ur unf jevggra n
ernyyl ornhgvshy yrggre, n cbrz va vgfrys, gb gur pbheg zvffvbanel bs gur
Ersbezrq Cevrfgf' Cebgrpgvba Fbpvrgl juvpu pyrnef hc rirelguvat. Ur vf
cenpgvpnyyl n gbgny nofgnvare naq V pna nssvez gung ur fyrrcf ba n fgenj
yvggre naq rngf gur zbfg Fcnegna sbbq, pbyq qevrq tebpre'f crnf. Ur jrnef
n unvefuveg bs cher Vevfu znahsnpgher jvagre naq fhzzre naq fpbhetrf
uvzfrys rirel Fngheqnl. Ur jnf, V haqrefgnaq, ng bar gvzr n svefgpynff
zvfqrzrnanag va Tyraperr ersbezngbel. Nabgure ercbeg fgngrf gung ur jnf n
irel cbfguhzbhf puvyq. V nccrny sbe pyrzrapl va gur anzr bs gur zbfg
fnperq jbeq bhe ibpny betnaf unir rire orra pnyyrq hcba gb fcrnx. Ur vf
nobhg gb unir n onol.

(TRARENY PBZZBGVBA NAQ PBZCNFFVBA. JBZRA SNVAG. N JRNYGUL NZREVPNA ZNXRF
N FGERRG PBYYRPGVBA SBE OYBBZ. TBYQ NAQ FVYIRE PBVAF, OYNAX PURDHRF,
ONAXABGRF, WRJRYF, GERNFHEL OBAQF, ZNGHEVAT OVYYF BS RKPUNATR, V. B. H'F,
JRQQVAT EVATF, JNGPUPUNVAF, YBPXRGF, ARPXYNPRF NAQ OENPRYRGF NER ENCVQYL
PBYYRPGRQ.)

OYBBZ: B, V fb jnag gb or n zbgure.

ZEF GUBEAGBA: (VA AHEFRGRAQRE'F TBJA) Rzoenpr zr gvtug, qrne. Lbh'yy or
fbba bire vg. Gvtug, qrne.

(OYBBZ RZOENPRF URE GVTUGYL NAQ ORNEF RVTUG ZNYR LRYYBJ NAQ JUVGR
PUVYQERA. GURL NCCRNE BA N ERQPNECRGRQ FGNVEPNFR NQBEARQ JVGU RKCRAFVIR
CYNAGF. NYY GUR BPGHCYRGF NER UNAQFBZR, JVGU INYHNOYR ZRGNYYVP SNPRF,
JRYYZNQR, ERFCRPGNOYL QERFFRQ NAQ JRYYPBAQHPGRQ, FCRNXVAT SVIR ZBQREA
YNATHNTRF SYHRAGYL NAQ VAGRERFGRQ VA INEVBHF NEGF NAQ FPVRAPRF. RNPU UNF
UVF ANZR CEVAGRQ VA YRTVOYR YRGGREF BA UVF FUVEGSEBAG: ANFBQBEB,
TBYQSVATRE, PUELFBFGBZBF, ZNVAQBERR, FVYIREFZVYR, FVYOREFRYORE,
IVSNETRAG, CNANETLEBF. GURL NER VZZRQVNGRYL NCCBVAGRQ GB CBFVGVBAF BS
UVTU CHOYVP GEHFG VA FRIRENY QVSSRERAG PBHAGEVRF NF ZNANTVAT QVERPGBEF BS
ONAXF, GENSSVP ZNANTREF BS ENVYJNLF, PUNVEZRA BS YVZVGRQ YVNOVYVGL
PBZCNAVRF, IVPRPUNVEZRA BS UBGRY FLAQVPNGRF.)

N IBVPR: Oybbz, ner lbh gur Zrffvnu ora Wbfrcu be ora Qnivq?

OYBBZ: (QNEXYL) Lbh unir fnvq vg.

OEBGURE OHMM: Gura cresbez n zvenpyr yvxr Sngure Puneyrf.

ONAGNZ YLBAF: Cebcurfl jub jvyy jva gur Fnvag Yrtre.

(OYBBZ JNYXF BA N ARG, PBIREF UVF YRSG RLR JVGU UVF YRSG RNE, CNFFRF
GUEBHTU FRIRENY JNYYF, PYVZOF ARYFBA'F CVYYNE, UNATF SEBZ GUR GBC YRQTR
OL UVF RLRYVQF, RNGF GJRYIR QBMRA BLFGREF (FURYYF VAPYHQRQ), URNYF
FRIRENY FHSSREREF SEBZ XVAT'F RIVY, PBAGENPGF UVF SNPR FB NF GB ERFRZOYR
ZNAL UVFGBEVPNY CREFBANTRF, YBEQ ORNPBAFSVRYQ, YBEQ OLEBA, JNG GLYRE,
ZBFRF BS RTLCG, ZBFRF ZNVZBAVQRF, ZBFRF ZRAQRYFFBUA, URAEL VEIVAT, EVC
INA JVAXYR, XBFFHGU, WRNA WNPDHRF EBHFFRNH, ONEBA YRBCBYQ EBGUFPUVYQ,
EBOVAFBA PEHFBR, FUREYBPX UBYZRF, CNFGRHE, GHEAF RNPU SBBG FVZHYGNARBHFYL
VA QVSSRERAG QVERPGVBAF, OVQF GUR GVQR GHEA ONPX, RPYVCFRF GUR FHA OL
RKGRAQVAT UVF YVGGYR SVATRE.)

OEVAV, CNCNY AHAPVB: (VA CNCNY MBHNIR'F HAVSBEZ, FGRRY PHVENFFRF NF
OERNFGCYNGR, NEZCYNGRF, GUVTUCYNGRF, YRTCYNGRF, YNETR CEBSNAR ZBHFGNPURF
NAQ OEBJA CNCRE ZVGER) YRBCBYQV NHGRZ TRARENGVB. Zbfrf ortng Abnu naq
Abnu ortng Rhahpu naq Rhahpu ortng B'Unyybena naq B'Unyybena ortng
Thttraurvz naq Thttraurvz ortng Ntraqngu naq Ntraqngu ortng Argnvz naq
Argnvz ortng Yr Uvefpu naq Yr Uvefpu ortng Wrfhehz naq Wrfhehz ortng
ZnpXnl naq ZnpXnl ortng Bfgebybcfxl naq Bfgebybcfxl ortng Fzreqbm naq
Fzreqbm ortng Jrvff naq Jrvff ortng Fpujnem naq Fpujnem ortng Nqevnabcbyv
naq Nqevnabcbyv ortng Nenawhrm naq Nenawhrm ortng Yrjl Ynjfba naq Yrjl
Ynjfba ortng Vpunohqbabfbe naq Vpunohqbabfbe ortng B'Qbaaryy Zntahf naq
B'Qbaaryy Zntahf ortng Puevfgonhz naq Puevfgonhz ortng ora Znvzha naq ora
Znvzha ortng Qhfgl Eubqrf naq Qhfgl Eubqrf ortng Oranzbe naq Oranzbe
ortng Wbarf-Fzvgu naq Wbarf-Fzvgu ortng Fnibetanabivpu naq Fnibetanabivpu
ortng Wnfcrefgbar naq Wnfcrefgbar ortng Ivatgrghavrzr naq Ivatgrghavrzr
ortng Fmbzonguryl naq Fmbzonguryl ortng Ivent naq Ivent ortng Oybbz RG
IBPNOVGHE ABZRA RVHF RZZNAHRY.

N QRNQUNAQ: (JEVGRF BA GUR JNYY) Oybbz vf n pbq.

PENO: (VA OHFUENATRE'F XVG) Jung qvq lbh qb va gur pnggyrperrc oruvaq
Xvyoneenpx?

N SRZNYR VASNAG: (FUNXRF N ENGGYR) Naq haqre Onyylobhtu oevqtr?

N UBYYLOHFU: Naq va gur qrivy'f tyra?

OYBBZ: (OYHFURF SHEVBHFYL NYY BIRE SEBZ SEBAF GB ANGRF, GUERR GRNEF
SVYYVAT SEBZ UVF YRSG RLR) Fcner zl cnfg.

GUR VEVFU RIVPGRQ GRANAGF: (VA OBQLPBNGF, XARROERRPURF, JVGU QBAALOEBBX
SNVE FUVYYRYNTUF) Fwnzobx uvz!

(OYBBZ JVGU NFFRF' RNEF FRNGF UVZFRYS VA GUR CVYYBEL JVGU PEBFFRQ NEZF,
UVF SRRG CEBGEHQVAT. UR JUVFGYRF Qba Tvbinaav, n prane grpb. NEGNAR
BECUNAF, WBVAVAT UNAQF, PNCRE EBHAQ UVZ. TVEYF BS GUR CEVFBA TNGR
ZVFFVBA, WBVAVAT UNAQF, PNCRE EBHAQ VA GUR BCCBFVGR QVERPGVBA.)

GUR NEGNAR BECUNAF:


    Lbh uvt, lbh ubt, lbh qvegl qbt!
    Lbh guvax gur ynqvrf ybir lbh!


GUR CEVFBA TNGR TVEYF:


    Vs lbh frr Xnl
    Gryy uvz ur znl
    Frr lbh va grn
    Gryy uvz sebz zr.


UBEAOYBJRE: (VA RCUBQ NAQ UHAGVATPNC, NAABHAPRF) Naq ur funyy pneel gur
fvaf bs gur crbcyr gb Nmnmry, gur fcvevg juvpu vf va gur jvyqrearff, naq
gb Yvyvgu, gur avtugunt. Naq gurl funyy fgbar uvz naq qrsvyr uvz, lrn,
nyy sebz Ntraqngu Argnvz naq sebz Zvmenvz, gur ynaq bs Unz.

(NYY GUR CRBCYR PNFG FBSG CNAGBZVZR FGBARF NG OYBBZ. ZNAL OBANSVQR
GENIRYYREF NAQ BJAREYRFF QBTF PBZR ARNE UVZ NAQ QRSVYR UVZ. ZNFGVNAFXL
NAQ PVGEBA NCCEBNPU VA TNOREQVARF, JRNEVAT YBAT RNEYBPXF. GURL JNT GURVE
ORNEQF NG OYBBZ.)

ZNFGVNAFXL NAQ PVGEBA: Oryvny! Ynrzyrva bs Vfgevn, gur snyfr Zrffvnu!
Nohynsvn! Erpnag!

(TRBETR E ZRFVNF, OYBBZ'F GNVYBE, NCCRNEF, N GNVYBE'F TBBFR HAQRE UVF
NEZ, CERFRAGVAT N OVYY)

ZRFVNF: Gb nygrengvba bar cnve gebhfref ryrira fuvyyvatf.

OYBBZ: (EHOF UVF UNAQF PURRESHYYL) Whfg yvxr byq gvzrf. Cbbe Oybbz!

(ERHORA W QBQQ, OYNPXORNEQRQ VFPNEVBG, ONQ FURCUREQ, ORNEVAT BA UVF
FUBHYQREF GUR QEBJARQ PBECFR BS UVF FBA, NCCEBNPURF GUR CVYYBEL.)

ERHORA W: (JUVFCREF UBNEFRYL) Gur fdhrnx vf bhg. N fcyvg vf tbar sbe gur
synggvrf. Avc gur svefg enggyre.

GUR SVER OEVTNQR: Csynnc!

OEBGURE OHMM: (VAIRFGF OYBBZ VA N LRYYBJ UNOVG JVGU RZOEBVQREL BS CNVAGRQ
SYNZRF NAQ UVTU CBVAGRQ UNG. UR CYNPRF N ONT BS THACBJQRE EBHAQ UVF ARPX
NAQ UNAQF UVZ BIRE GB GUR PVIVY CBJRE, FNLVAT) Sbetvir uvz uvf
gerfcnffrf.

(YVRHGRANAG ZLREF BS GUR QHOYVA SVER OEVTNQR OL TRARENY ERDHRFG FRGF SVER
GB OYBBZ. YNZRAGNGVBAF.)

GUR PVGVMRA: Gunax urnira!

OYBBZ: (VA N FRNZYRFF TNEZRAG ZNEXRQ V. U. F. FGNAQF HCEVTUG NZVQ CUBRAVK
SYNZRF) Jrrc abg sbe zr, B qnhtugref bs Reva.

(UR RKUVOVGF GB QHOYVA ERCBEGREF GENPRF BS OHEAVAT. GUR QNHTUGREF BS
REVA, VA OYNPX TNEZRAGF, JVGU YNETR CENLREOBBXF NAQ YBAT YVTUGRQ PNAQYRF
VA GURVE UNAQF, XARRY QBJA NAQ CENL.)

GUR QNHTUGREF BS REVA:


    Xvqarl bs Oybbz, cenl sbe hf
    Sybjre bs gur Ongu, cenl sbe hf
    Zragbe bs Zragba, cenl sbe hf
    Pnainffre sbe gur Serrzna, cenl sbe hf
    Punevgnoyr Znfba, cenl sbe hf
    Jnaqrevat Fbnc, cenl sbe hf
    Fjrrgf bs Fva, cenl sbe hf
    Zhfvp jvgubhg Jbeqf, cenl sbe hf
    Ercebire bs gur Pvgvmra, cenl sbe hf
    Sevraq bs nyy Sevyyvrf, cenl sbe hf
    Zvqjvsr Zbfg Zrepvshy, cenl sbe hf
    Cbgngb Cerfreingvir ntnvafg Cynthr naq Crfgvyrapr, cenl sbe hf.


(N PUBVE BS FVK UHAQERQ IBVPRF, PBAQHPGRQ OL IVAPRAG B'OEVRA, FVATF GUR
PUBEHF SEBZ UNAQRY'F ZRFFVNU NYYRYHVN SBE GUR YBEQ TBQ BZAVCBGRAG
ERVTARGU, NPPBZCNAVRQ BA GUR BETNA OL WBFRCU TYLAA. OYBBZ ORPBZRF ZHGR,
FUEHAXRA, PNEOBAVFRQ.)

MBR: Gnyx njnl gvyy lbh'er oynpx va gur snpr.

OYBBZ: (VA PNHORRA JVGU PYNL CVCR FGHPX VA GUR ONAQ, QHFGL OEBTHRF, NA
RZVTENAG'F ERQ UNAQXREPUVRS OHAQYR VA UVF UNAQ, YRNQVAT N OYNPX OBTBNX
CVT OL N FHTNHA, JVGU N FZVYR VA UVF RLR) Yrg zr or tbvat abj, jbzna bs
gur ubhfr, sbe ol nyy gur tbngf va Pbaarznen V'z nsgre univat gur sngure
naq zbgure bs n ongvat. (JVGU N GRNE VA UVF RLR) Nyy vafnavgl.
Cngevbgvfz, fbeebj sbe gur qrnq, zhfvp, shgher bs gur enpr. Gb or be abg
gb or. Yvsr'f qernz vf b're. Raq vg crnprshyyl. Gurl pna yvir ba. (UR
TNMRF SNE NJNL ZBHEASHYYL) V nz ehvarq. N srj cnfgvyyrf bs npbavgr. Gur
oyvaqf qenja. N yrggre. Gura yvr onpx gb erfg. (UR OERNGURF FBSGYL) Ab
zber. V unir yvirq. Sner. Snerjryy.

MBR: (FGVSSYL, URE SVATRE VA URE ARPXSVYYRG) Ubarfg? Gvyy gur arkg gvzr.
(FUR FARREF) Fhccbfr lbh tbg hc gur jebat fvqr bs gur orq be pnzr gbb
dhvpx jvgu lbhe orfg tvey. B, V pna ernq lbhe gubhtugf!

OYBBZ: (OVGGREYL) Zna naq jbzna, ybir, jung vf vg? N pbex naq obggyr. V'z
fvpx bs vg. Yrg rirelguvat evc.

MBR: (VA FHQQRA FHYXF) V ungr n ebggre gung'f vafvaprer. Tvir n oyrrqvat
juber n punapr.

OYBBZ: (ERCRAGNAGYL) V nz irel qvfnterrnoyr. Lbh ner n arprffnel rivy.
Jurer ner lbh sebz? Ybaqba?

MBR: (TYVOYL) Ubt'f Abegba jurer gur cvtf cynlf gur betnaf. V'z Lbexfuver
obea. (FUR UBYQF UVF UNAQ JUVPU VF SRRYVAT SBE URE AVCCYR) V fnl, Gbzzl
Gvggyrzbhfr. Fgbc gung naq ortva jbefr. Unir lbh pnfu sbe n fubeg gvzr?
Gra fuvyyvatf?

OYBBZ: (FZVYRF, ABQF FYBJYL) Zber, ubhev, zber.

MBR: Naq zber'f zbgure? (FUR CNGF UVZ BSSUNAQRQYL JVGU IRYIRG CNJF) Ner
lbh pbzvat vagb gur zhfvpebbz gb frr bhe arj cvnabyn? Pbzr naq V'yy crry
bss.

OYBBZ: (SRRYVAT UVF BPPVCHG QHOVBHFYL JVGU GUR HACNENYYRYRQ RZONEENFFZRAG
BS N UNENFFRQ CRQYNE TNHTVAT GUR FLZZRGEL BS URE CRRYRQ CRNEF) Fbzrobql
jbhyq or qernqshyyl wrnybhf vs fur xarj. Gur terrarlrq zbafgre.
(RNEARFGYL) Lbh xabj ubj qvssvphyg vg vf. V arrqa'g gryy lbh.

MBR: (SYNGGRERQ) Jung gur rlr pna'g frr gur urneg pna'g tevrir sbe. (FUR
CNGF UVZ) Pbzr.

OYBBZ: Ynhtuvat jvgpu! Gur unaq gung ebpxf gur penqyr.

MBR: Onool!

OYBBZ: (VA ONOLYVARA NAQ CRYVFFR, OVTURNQRQ, JVGU N PNHY BS QNEX UNVE,
SVKRF OVT RLRF BA URE SYHVQ FYVC NAQ PBHAGF VGF OEBAMR OHPXYRF JVGU N
PUHOOL SVATRE, UVF ZBVFG GBATHR YBYYVAT NAQ YVFCVAT) Bar gjb gyrr: gyrr
gyjb gybar.

GUR OHPXYRF: Ybir zr. Ybir zr abg. Ybir zr.

MBR: Fvyrag zrnaf pbafrag. (JVGU YVGGYR CNEGRQ GNYBAF FUR PNCGHERF UVF
UNAQ, URE SBERSVATRE TVIVAT GB UVF CNYZ GUR CNFFGBHPU BS FRPERG ZBAVGBE,
YHEVAT UVZ GB QBBZ.) Ubg unaqf pbyq tvmmneq.

(UR URFVGNGRF NZVQ FPRAGF, ZHFVP, GRZCGNGVBAF. FUR YRNQF UVZ GBJNEQF GUR
FGRCF, QENJVAT UVZ OL GUR BQBHE BS URE NEZCVGF, GUR IVPR BS URE CNVAGRQ
RLRF, GUR EHFGYR BS URE FYVC VA JUBFR FVAHBHF SBYQF YHEXF GUR YVBA ERRX
BS NYY GUR ZNYR OEHGRF GUNG UNIR CBFFRFFRQ URE.)

GUR ZNYR OEHGRF: (RKUNYVAT FHYCUHE BS EHG NAQ QHAT NAQ ENZCVAT VA GURVE
YBBFROBK, SNVAGYL EBNEVAT, GURVE QEHTTRQ URNQF FJNLVAT GB NAQ SEB) Tbbq!

(MBR NAQ OYBBZ ERNPU GUR QBBEJNL JURER GJB FVFGRE JUBERF NER FRNGRQ. GURL
RKNZVAR UVZ PHEVBHFYL SEBZ HAQRE GURVE CRAPVYYRQ OEBJF NAQ FZVYR GB UVF
UNFGL OBJ. UR GEVCF NJXJNEQYL.)

MBR: (URE YHPXL UNAQ VAFGNAGYL FNIVAT UVZ) Ubbcfn! Qba'g snyy hcfgnvef.

OYBBZ: Gur whfg zna snyyf frira gvzrf. (UR FGNAQF NFVQR NG GUR GUERFUBYQ)
Nsgre lbh vf tbbq znaaref.

MBR: Ynqvrf svefg, tragyrzra nsgre.

(FUR PEBFFRF GUR GUERFUBYQ. UR URFVGNGRF. FUR GHEAF NAQ, UBYQVAT BHG URE
UNAQF, QENJF UVZ BIRE. UR UBCF. BA GUR NAGYRERQ ENPX BS GUR UNYY UNAT N
ZNA 'F UNG NAQ JNGRECEBBS. OYBBZ HAPBIREF UVZFRYS OHG, FRRVAT GURZ,
SEBJAF, GURA FZVYRF, CERBPPHCVRQ. N QBBE BA GUR ERGHEA YNAQVAT VF SYHAT
BCRA. N ZNA VA CHECYR FUVEG NAQ TERL GEBHFREF, OEBJAFBPXRQ, CNFFRF JVGU
NA NCR'F TNVG, UVF ONYQ URNQ NAQ TBNGRR ORNEQ HCURYQ, UHTTVAT N SHYY
JNGREWHTWNE, UVF GJBGNVYRQ OYNPX OENPRF QNATYVAT NG URRYF. NIREGVAT UVF
SNPR DHVPXYL OYBBZ ORAQF GB RKNZVAR BA GUR UNYYGNOYR GUR FCNAVRY RLRF BS
N EHAAVAT SBK: GURA, UVF YVSGRQ URNQ FAVSSVAT, SBYYBJF MBR VAGB GUR
ZHFVPEBBZ. N FUNQR BS ZNHIR GVFFHRCNCRE QVZF GUR YVTUG BS GUR PUNAQRYVRE.
EBHAQ NAQ EBHAQ N ZBGU SYVRF, PBYYVQVAT, RFPNCVAT. GUR SYBBE VF PBIRERQ
JVGU NA BVYPYBGU ZBFNVP BS WNQR NAQ NMHER NAQ PVAANONE EUBZOBVQF.
SBBGZNEXF NER FGNZCRQ BIRE VG VA NYY FRAFRF, URRY GB URRY, URRY GB
UBYYBJ, GBR GB GBR, SRRG YBPXRQ, N ZBEEVF BS FUHSSYVAT SRRG JVGUBHG OBQL
CUNAGBZF, NYY VA N FPEVZZNTR UVTTYRQLCVTTYRQL. GUR JNYYF NER GNCRFGEVRQ
JVGU N CNCRE BS LRJSEBAQF NAQ PYRNE TYNQRF. VA GUR TENGR VF FCERNQ N
FPERRA BS CRNPBPX SRNGUREF. YLAPU FDHNGF PEBFFYRTTRQ BA GUR URNEGUEHT BS
ZNGGRQ UNVE, UVF PNC ONPX GB GUR SEBAG. JVGU N JNAQ UR ORNGF GVZR FYBJYL.
XVGGL EVPXRGGF, N OBAL CNYYVQ JUBER VA ANIL PBFGHZR, QBRFXVA TYBIRF
EBYYRQ ONPX SEBZ N PBENY JEVFGYRG, N PUNVA CHEFR VA URE UNAQ, FVGF
CREPURQ BA GUR RQTR BS GUR GNOYR FJVATVAT URE YRT NAQ TYNAPVAT NG UREFRYS
VA GUR TVYG ZVEEBE BIRE GUR ZNAGRYCVRPR. N GNT BS URE PBEFRGYNPR UNATF
FYVTUGYL ORYBJ URE WNPXRG. YLAPU VAQVPNGRF ZBPXVATYL GUR PBHCYR NG GUR
CVNAB.)

XVGGL: (PBHTUF ORUVAQ URE UNAQ) Fur'f n ovg vzorpvyyvp. (FUR FVTAF JVGU N
JNTTYVAT SBERSVATRE) Oyrzoyrz. (YLAPU YVSGF HC URE FXVEG NAQ JUVGR
CRGGVPBNG JVGU UVF JNAQ FUR FRGGYRF GURZ QBJA DHVPXYL.) Erfcrpg lbhefrys.
(FUR UVPPHCF, GURA ORAQF DHVPXYL URE FNVYBE UNG HAQRE JUVPU URE UNVE
TYBJF, ERQ JVGU URAAN) B, rkphfr!

MBR: Zber yvzryvtug, Puneyrl. (FUR TBRF GB GUR PUNAQRYVRE NAQ GHEAF GUR
TNF SHYY PBPX)

XVGGL: (CRREF NG GUR TNFWRG) Jung nvyf vg gbavtug?

YLAPU: (QRRCYL) Ragre n tubfg naq ubotboyvaf.

MBR: Pync ba gur onpx sbe Mbr.

(GUR JNAQ VA YLAPU'F UNAQ SYNFURF: N OENFF CBXRE. FGRCURA FGNAQF NG GUR
CVNABYN BA JUVPU FCENJY UVF UNG NAQ NFUCYNAG. JVGU GJB SVATREF UR ERCRNGF
BAPR ZBER GUR FREVRF BS RZCGL SVSGUF. SYBEEL GNYOBG, N OYBAQ SRROYR
TBBFRSNG JUBER VA N GNGGREQRZNYVBA TBJA BS ZVYQRJRQ FGENJOREEL, YBYYF
FCERNQRNTYR VA GUR FBSNPBEARE, URE YVZC SBERNEZ CRAQRAG BIRE GUR OBYFGRE,
YVFGRAVAT. N URNIL FGLR QEBBCF BIRE URE FYRRCL RLRYVQ.)

XVGGL: (UVPPHCF NTNVA JVGU N XVPX BS URE UBEFRQ SBBG) B, rkphfr!

MBR: (CEBZCGYL) Lbhe obl'f guvaxvat bs lbh. Gvr n xabg ba lbhe fuvsg.

(XVGGL EVPXRGGF ORAQF URE URNQ. URE OBN HAPBVYF, FYVQRF, TYVQRF BIRE URE
FUBHYQRE, ONPX, NEZ, PUNVE GB GUR TEBHAQ. YLAPU YVSGF GUR PHEYRQ
PNGRECVYYNE BA UVF JNAQ. FUR FANXRF URE ARPX, ARFGYVAT. FGRCURA TYNAPRF
ORUVAQ NG GUR FDHNGGRQ SVTHER JVGU VGF PNC ONPX GB GUR SEBAG.)

FGRCURA: Nf n znggre bs snpg vg vf bs ab vzcbegnapr jurgure Orarqrggb
Znepryyb sbhaq vg be znqr vg. Gur evgr vf gur cbrg'f erfg. Vg znl or na
byq ulza gb Qrzrgre be nyfb vyyhfgengr PBRYN RANEENAG TYBEVNZ QBZVAV. Vg
vf fhfprcgvoyr bs abqrf be zbqrf nf sne ncneg nf ulcrecueltvna naq
zvkbylqvna naq bs grkgf fb qviretrag nf cevrfgf unvubbcvat ebhaq Qnivq'f
gung vf Pvepr'f be jung nz V fnlvat Prerf' nygne naq Qnivq'f gvc sebz gur
fgnoyr gb uvf puvrs onffbbavfg nobhg gur nyevtugarff bs uvf nyzvtugvarff.
ZNVF ABZ QR ABZ, gung vf nabgure cnve bs gebhfref. WRGRM YN TBHEZR. SNHG
DHR WRHARFFR FR CNFFR. (UR FGBCF, CBVAGF NG YLAPU'F PNC, FZVYRF, YNHTUF)
Juvpu fvqr vf lbhe xabjyrqtr ohzc?

GUR PNC: (JVGU FNGHEAVAR FCYRRA) Onu! Vg vf orpnhfr vg vf. Jbzna'f
ernfba. Wrjterrx vf terrxwrj. Rkgerzrf zrrg. Qrngu vf gur uvturfg sbez bs
yvsr. Onu!

FGRCURA: Lbh erzrzore snveyl npphengryl nyy zl reebef, obnfgf, zvfgnxrf.
Ubj ybat funyy V pbagvahr gb pybfr zl rlrf gb qvfyblnygl? Jurgfgbar!

GUR PNC: Onu!

FGRCURA: Urer'f nabgure sbe lbh. (UR SEBJAF) Gur ernfba vf orpnhfr gur
shaqnzragny naq gur qbzvanag ner frcnengrq ol gur terngrfg cbffvoyr
vagreiny juvpu ...

GUR PNC: Juvpu? Svavfu. Lbh pna'g.

FGRCURA: (JVGU NA RSSBEG) Vagreiny juvpu. Vf gur terngrfg cbffvoyr
ryyvcfr. Pbafvfgrag jvgu. Gur hygvzngr erghea. Gur bpgnir. Juvpu.

GUR PNC: Juvpu?

(BHGFVQR GUR TENZBCUBAR ORTVAF GB OYNER Gur Ubyl Pvgl.)

FGRCURA: (NOEHCGYL) Jung jrag sbegu gb gur raqf bs gur jbeyq gb genirefr
abg vgfrys, Tbq, gur fha, Funxrfcrner, n pbzzrepvny geniryyre, univat
vgfrys genirefrq va ernyvgl vgfrys orpbzrf gung frys. Jnvg n zbzrag. Jnvg
n frpbaq. Qnza gung sryybj'f abvfr va gur fgerrg. Frys juvpu vg vgfrys
jnf varyhpgnoyl cerpbaqvgvbarq gb orpbzr. RPPB!

YLAPU: (JVGU N ZBPXVAT JUVAAL BS YNHTUGRE TEVAF NG OYBBZ NAQ MBR UVTTVAF)
Jung n yrnearq fcrrpu, ru?

MBR: (OEVFXYL) Tbq uryc lbhe urnq, ur xabjf zber guna lbh unir sbetbggra.

(JVGU BORFR FGHCVQVGL SYBEEL GNYOBG ERTNEQF FGRCURA.)

SYBEEL: Gurl fnl gur ynfg qnl vf pbzvat guvf fhzzre.

XVGGL: Ab!

MBR: (RKCYBQRF VA YNHTUGRE) Terng hawhfg Tbq!

SYBEEL: (BSSRAQRQ) Jryy, vg jnf va gur cncref nobhg Nagvpuevfg. B, zl
sbbg'f gvpxyvat.

(ENTTRQ ONERSBBG ARJFOBLF, WBTTVAT N JNTGNVY XVGR, CNGGRE CNFG, LRYYVAT.)

GUR ARJFOBLF: Fgbc cerff rqvgvba. Erfhyg bs gur ebpxvatubefr enprf. Frn
frecrag va gur eblny pnany. Fnsr neeviny bs Nagvpuevfg.

(FGRCURA GHEAF NAQ FRRF OYBBZ.)

FGRCURA: N gvzr, gvzrf naq unys n gvzr.

(ERHORA V NAGVPUEVFG, JNAQREVAT WRJ, N PYHGPUVAT UNAQ BCRA BA UVF FCVAR,
FGHZCF SBEJNEQ. NPEBFF UVF YBVAF VF FYHAT N CVYTEVZ'F JNYYRG SEBZ JUVPU
CEBGEHQR CEBZVFFBEL ABGRF NAQ QVFUBABHERQ OVYYF. NYBSG BIRE UVF FUBHYQRE
UR ORNEF N YBAT OBNGCBYR SEBZ GUR UBBX BS JUVPU GUR FBQQRA UHQQYRQ ZNFF
BS UVF BAYL FBA, FNIRQ SEBZ YVSSRL JNGREF, UNATF SEBZ GUR FYNPX BS VGF
OERRPURF. N UBOTBOYVA VA GUR VZNTR BS CHAPU PBFGRYYB, UVCFUBG,
PEBBXONPXRQ, ULQEBPRCUNYVP, CEBTANGUVP JVGU ERPRQVAT SBERURNQ NAQ NYYL
FYBCRE ABFR, GHZOYRF VA FBZREFNHYGF GUEBHTU GUR TNGUREVAT QNEXARFF.)

NYY: Jung?

GUR UBOTBOYVA: (UVF WNJF PUNGGREVAT, PNCREF GB NAQ SEB, TBTTYVAT UVF
RLRF, FDHRNXVAT, XNATNEBBUBCCVAT JVGU BHGFGERGPURQ PYHGPUVAT NEZF, GURA
NYY NG BAPR GUEHFGF UVF YVCYRFF SNPR GUEBHTU GUR SBEX BS UVF GUVTUF) VY
IVRAG! P'RFG ZBV! Y'UBZZR DHV EVG! Y'UBZZR CEVZVTRAR! (UR JUVEYF EBHAQ
NAQ EBHAQ JVGU QREIVFU UBJYF) FVRHEF RG QNZRF, SNVGRF IBF WRHK! (UR
PEBHPURF WHTTYVAT. GVAL EBHYRGGR CYNARGF SYL SEBZ UVF UNAQF.) YRF WRHK
FBAG SNVGF! (GUR CYNARGF EHFU GBTRGURE, HGGREVAT PERCVGNAG PENPXF) EVRA
IN CYHF! (GUR CYNARGF, OHBLNAG ONYYBBAF, FNVY FJBYYRA HC NAQ NJNL. UR
FCEVATF BSS VAGB INPHHZ.)

SYBEEL: (FVAXVAT VAGB GBECBE, PEBFFVAT UREFRYS FRPERGYL) Gur raq bs gur
jbeyq!

(N SRZNYR GRCVQ RSSYHIVHZ YRNXF BHG SEBZ URE. AROHYBHF BOFPHEVGL BPPHCVRF
FCNPR. GUEBHTU GUR QEVSGVAT SBT JVGUBHG GUR TENZBCUBAR OYNERF BIRE PBHTUF
NAQ SRRGFUHSSYVAT.)

GUR TENZBCUBAR: Wrehfnyrz!

Bcra lbhe tngrf naq fvat

Ubfnaan ...

(N EBPXRG EHFURF HC GUR FXL NAQ OHEFGF. N JUVGR FGNE SVYYF SEBZ VG,
CEBPYNVZVAT GUR PBAFHZZNGVBA BS NYY GUVATF NAQ FRPBAQ PBZVAT BS RYVWNU.
NYBAT NA VASVAVGR VAIVFVOYR GVTUGEBCR GNHG SEBZ MRAVGU GB ANQVE GUR RAQ
BS GUR JBEYQ, N GJBURNQRQ BPGBCHF VA TVYYVR'F XVYGF, OHFOL NAQ GNEGNA
SVYVORTF, JUVEYF GUEBHTU GUR ZHEX, URNQ BIRE URRYF, VA GUR SBEZ BS GUR
GUERR YRTF BS ZNA.)

GUR RAQ BS GUR JBEYQ: (JVGU N FPBGPU NPPRAG) Jun'yy qnapr gur xrry ebj,
gur xrry ebj, gur xrry ebj?

(BIRE GUR CBFFVAT QEVSG NAQ PUBXVAT OERNGUPBHTUF, RYVWNU'F IBVPR, UNEFU
NF N PBEAPENXR'F, WNEF BA UVTU. CREFCVEVAT VA N YBBFR YNJA FHECYVPR JVGU
SHAARY FYRRIRF UR VF FRRA, IRETRESNPRQ, NOBIR N EBFGEHZ NOBHG JUVPU GUR
ONAARE BS BYQ TYBEL VF QENCRQ. UR GUHZCF GUR CNENCRG.)

RYVWNU: Ab lnccvat, vs lbh cyrnfr, va guvf obbgu. Wnxr Penar, Perbyr Fhr,
Qbir Pnzcoryy, Nor Xvefpuare, qb lbhe pbhtuvat jvgu lbhe zbhguf fuhg.
Fnl, V nz bcrengvat nyy guvf gehax yvar. Oblf, qb vg abj. Tbq'f gvzr vf
12.25. Gryy zbgure lbh'yy or gurer. Ehfu lbhe beqre naq lbh cynl n fyvpx
npr. Wbva ba evtug urer. Obbx guebhtu gb rgreavgl whapgvba, gur abafgbc
eha. Whfg bar jbeq zber. Ner lbh n tbq be n qbttbar pybq? Vs gur frpbaq
nqirag pnzr gb Pbarl Vfynaq ner jr ernql? Sybeel Puevfg, Fgrcura Puevfg,
Mbr Puevfg, Oybbz Puevfg, Xvggl Puevfg, Ylapu Puevfg, vg'f hc gb lbh gb
frafr gung pbfzvp sbepr. Unir jr pbyq srrg nobhg gur pbfzbf? Ab. Or ba
gur fvqr bs gur natryf. Or n cevfz. Lbh unir gung fbzrguvat jvguva, gur
uvture frys. Lbh pna eho fubhyqref jvgu n Wrfhf, n Tnhgnzn, na Vatrefbyy.
Ner lbh nyy va guvf ivoengvba? V fnl lbh ner. Lbh bapr abooyr gung,
pbatertngvba, naq n ohpx wblevqr gb urnira orpbzrf n onpx ahzore. Lbh tbg
zr? Vg'f n yvsroevtugrare, fher. Gur ubggrfg fghss rire jnf. Vg'f gur
jubyr cvr jvgu wnz va. Vg'f whfg gur phgrfg fanccvrfg yvar bhg. Vg vf
vzzrafr, fhcrefhzcghbhf. Vg erfgberf. Vg ivoengrf. V xabj naq V nz fbzr
ivoengbe. Wbxvat ncneg naq, trggvat qbja gb orqebpx, N. W. Puevfg Qbjvr
naq gur unezbavny cuvybfbcul, unir lbh tbg gung? B. X. Friraglfrira jrfg
fvkglavagu fgerrg. Tbg zr? Gung'f vg. Lbh pnyy zr hc ol fhacubar nal byq
gvzr. Ohzobbfref, fnir lbhe fgnzcf. (UR FUBHGF) Abj gura bhe tybel fbat.
Nyy wbva urnegvyl va gur fvatvat. Rapber! (UR FVATF) Wreh ...

GUR TENZBCUBAR: (QEBJAVAT UVF IBVPR) Jubehfnynzvalbheuvtuubuuuu ... (GUR
QVFP ENFCF TENGVATYL NTNVAFG GUR ARRQYR)

GUR GUERR JUBERF: (PBIREVAT GURVE RNEF, FDHNJX) Nuuxxx!

RYVWNU: (VA EBYYRQHC FUVEGFYRRIRF, OYNPX VA GUR SNPR, FUBHGF NG GUR GBC
BS UVF IBVPR, UVF NEZF HCYVSGRQ) Ovt Oebgure hc gurer, Ze Cerfvqrag, lbh
urne jung V qbar whfg orra fnlvat gb lbh. Pregnvayl, V fbeg bs oryvrir
fgebat va lbh, Ze Cerfvqrag. V pregnvayl nz guvaxvat abj Zvff Uvttvaf naq
Zvff Evpxrggf tbg eryvtvba jnl vafvqr gurz. Pregnvayl frrzf gb zr V qba'g
arire frr ab jhffre fpnerq srznyr guna gur jnl lbh orra, Zvff Sybeel,
whfg abj nf V qbar frrq lbh. Ze Cerfvqrag, lbh pbzr ybat naq uryc zr fnir
bhe fvfgref qrne. (UR JVAXF NG UVF NHQVRAPR) Bhe Ze Cerfvqrag, ur gjvt
gur jubyr ybg naq ur nvag fnlvat abguvat.

XVGGL-XNGR: V sbetbg zlfrys. Va n jrnx zbzrag V reerq naq qvq jung V qvq
ba Pbafgvghgvba uvyy. V jnf pbasvezrq ol gur ovfubc naq raebyyrq va gur
oebja fpnchyne. Zl zbgure'f fvfgre zneevrq n Zbagzberapl. Vg jnf n
jbexvat cyhzore jnf zl ehvangvba jura V jnf cher.

MBR-SNAAL: V yrg uvz yneehc vg vagb zr sbe gur sha bs vg.

SYBEEL-GRERFN: Vg jnf va pbafrdhrapr bs n cbegjvar orirentr ba gbc bs
Uraarffl'f guerr fgne. V jnf thvygl jvgu Juryna jura ur fyvccrq vagb gur
orq.

FGRCURA: Va gur ortvaavat jnf gur jbeq, va gur raq gur jbeyq jvgubhg raq.
Oyrffrq or gur rvtug orngvghqrf.

(GUR ORNGVGHQRF, QVKBA, ZNQQRA, PEBGGUREF, PBFGRYYB, YRARUNA, ONAABA,
ZHYYVTNA NAQ YLAPU VA JUVGR FHETVPNY FGHQRAGF' TBJAF, SBHE NOERNFG,
TBBFRFGRCCVAT, GENZC SVFG CNFG VA ABVFL ZNEPUVAT)

GUR ORNGVGHQRF: (VAPBURERAGYL) Orre orrs onggyrqbt ohlohyy ohfvahz oneahz
ohttrehz ovfubc.

YLFGRE: (VA DHNXRETERL XARROERRPURF NAQ OEBNQOEVZZRQ UNG, FNLF
QVFPERRGYL) Ur vf bhe sevraq. V arrq abg zragvba anzrf. Frrx gubh gur
yvtug.

(UR PBENAGBF OL. ORFG RAGREF VA UNVEQERFFRE'F NGGVER, FUVAVYL YNHAQRERQ,
UVF YBPXF VA PHEYCNCREF. UR YRNQF WBUA RTYVAGBA JUB JRNEF N ZNAQNEVA'F
XVZBAB BS ANAXRRA LRYYBJ, YVMNEQYRGGRERQ, NAQ N UVTU CNTBQN UNG.)

ORFG: (FZVYVAT, YVSGF GUR UNG NAQ QVFCYNLF N FUNIRA CBYY SEBZ GUR PEBJA
BS JUVPU OEVFGYRF N CVTGNVY GBHCRR GVRQ JVGU NA BENATR GBCXABG) V jnf
whfg ornhgvslvat uvz, qba'g lbh xabj. N guvat bs ornhgl, qba'g lbh xabj,
Lrngf fnlf, be V zrna, Xrngf fnlf.

WBUA RTYVAGBA: (CEBQHPRF N TERRAPNCCRQ QNEX YNAGREA NAQ SYNFURF VG
GBJNEQF N PBEARE: JVGU PNECVAT NPPRAG) Rfgurgvpf naq pbfzrgvpf ner sbe
gur obhqbve. V nz bhg sbe gehgu. Cynva gehgu sbe n cynva zna. Gnaqrentrr
jnagf gur snpgf naq zrnaf gb trg gurz.

(VA GUR PBAR BS GUR FRNEPUYVTUG ORUVAQ GUR PBNYFPHGGYR, BYYNIR, UBYLRLRQ,
GUR ORNEQRQ SVTHER BS ZNANANHA ZNPYVE OEBBQF, PUVA BA XARRF. UR EVFRF
FYBJYL. N PBYQ FRNJVAQ OYBJF SEBZ UVF QEHVQ ZBHGU. NOBHG UVF URNQ JEVGUR
RRYF NAQ RYIREF. UR VF RAPEHFGRQ JVGU JRRQF NAQ FURYYF. UVF EVTUG UNAQ
UBYQF N OVPLPYR CHZC. UVF YRSG UNAQ TENFCF N UHTR PENLSVFU OL VGF GJB
GNYBAF.)

ZNANANHA ZNPYVE: (JVGU N IBVPR BS JNIRF) Nhz! Urx! Jny! Nx! Yho! Zbe! Zn!
Juvgr lbtuva bs gur tbqf. Bpphyg cvznaqre bs Urezrf Gevfzrtvfgbf. (JVGU N
IBVPR BS JUVFGYVAT FRNJVAQ) Chanewnanz cngflchawnho! V jba'g unir zl yrt
chyyrq. Vg unf orra fnvq ol bar: orjner gur yrsg, gur phyg bs Funxgv.
(JVGU N PEL BS FGBEZOVEQF) Funxgv Fuvin, qnexuvqqra Sngure! (UR FZVGRF
JVGU UVF OVPLPYR CHZC GUR PENLSVFU VA UVF YRSG UNAQ. BA VGF PBBCRENGVIR
QVNY TYBJ GUR GJRYIR FVTAF BS GUR MBQVNP. UR JNVYF JVGU GUR IRURZRAPR BS
GUR BPRNA.) Nhz! Onhz! Clwnhz! V nz gur yvtug bs gur ubzrfgrnq! V nz gur
qernzrel pernzrel ohggre.

(N FXRYRGBA WHQNFUNAQ FGENATYRF GUR YVTUG. GUR TERRA YVTUG JNARF GB
ZNHIR. GUR TNFWRG JNVYF JUVFGYVAT.)

GUR TNFWRG: Cbbnu! Cshvvvvvvv!

(MBR EHAF GB GUR PUNAQRYVRE NAQ, PEBBXVAT URE YRT, NQWHFGF GUR ZNAGYR.)

MBR: Jub unf n snt nf V'z urer?

YLAPU: (GBFFVAT N PVTNERGGR BA GB GUR GNOYR) Urer.

MBR: (URE URNQ CREPURQ NFVQR VA ZBPX CEVQR) Vf gung gur jnl gb unaq gur
CBG gb n ynql? (FUR FGERGPURF HC GB YVTUG GUR PVTNERGGR BIRE GUR SYNZR,
GJVEYVAT VG FYBJYL, FUBJVAT GUR OEBJA GHSGF BS URE NEZCVGF. YLAPU JVGU
UVF CBXRE YVSGF OBYQYL N FVQR BS URE FYVC. ONER SEBZ URE TNEGREF HC URE
SYRFU NCCRNEF HAQRE GUR FNCCUVER N AVKVR'F TERRA. FUR CHSSF PNYZYL NG URE
PVTNERGGR.) Pna lbh frr gur ornhglfcbg bs zl oruvaq?

YLAPU: V'z abg ybbxvat

MBR: (ZNXRF FURRC'F RLRF) Ab? Lbh jbhyqa'g qb n yrff guvat. Jbhyq lbh
fhpx n yrzba?

(FDHVAGVAT VA ZBPX FUNZR FUR TYNAPRF JVGU FVQRYBAT ZRNAVAT NG OYBBZ, GURA
GJVFGF EBHAQ GBJNEQF UVZ, CHYYVAT URE FYVC SERR BS GUR CBXRE. OYHR SYHVQ
NTNVA SYBJF BIRE URE SYRFU. OYBBZ FGNAQF, FZVYVAT QRFVEBHFYL, GJVEYVAT
UVF GUHZOF. XVGGL EVPXRGGF YVPXF URE ZVQQYR SVATRE JVGU URE FCVGGYR NAQ,
TNMVAT VA GUR ZVEEBE, FZBBGUF OBGU RLROEBJF. YVCBGV IVENT,
ONFVYVPBTENZZNGR, PUHGRF ENCVQYL QBJA GUEBHTU GUR PUVZARLSYHR NAQ FGEHGF
GJB FGRCF GB GUR YRSG BA TNJXL CVAX FGVYGF. UR VF FNHFNTRQ VAGB FRIRENY
BIREPBNGF NAQ JRNEF N OEBJA ZNPVAGBFU HAQRE JUVPU UR UBYQF N EBYY BS
CNEPUZRAG. VA UVF YRSG RLR SYNFURF GUR ZBABPYR BS PNFURY OBLYR B'PBAABE
SVGMZNHEVPR GVFQNYY SNEERYY. BA UVF URNQ VF CREPURQ NA RTLCGVNA CFURAG.
GJB DHVYYF CEBWRPG BIRE UVF RNEF.)

IVENT: (URRYF GBTRGURE, OBJF) Zl anzr vf Ivent Yvcbgv, bs Fmbzonguryl.
(UR PBHTUF GUBHTUGSHYYL, QEVYL) Cebzvfphbhf anxrqarff vf zhpu va rivqrapr
urernobhgf, ru? Vanqiregragyl ure onpxivrj erirnyrq gur snpg gung fur vf
abg jrnevat gubfr engure vagvzngr tnezragf bs juvpu lbh ner n cnegvphyne
qribgrr. Gur vawrpgvba znex ba gur guvtu V ubcr lbh creprvirq? Tbbq.

OYBBZ: Tenacncnpuv. Ohg ...

IVENT: Ahzore gjb ba gur bgure unaq, fur bs gur pureel ebhtr naq
pbvssrhfr juvgr, jubfr unve bjrf abg n yvggyr gb bhe gevony ryvkve bs
tbcurejbbq, vf va jnyxvat pbfghzr naq gvtugyl fgnlfrq ol ure fvg, V
fubhyq bcvar. Onpxobar va sebag, fb gb fnl. Pbeerpg zr ohg V nyjnlf
haqrefgbbq gung gur npg fb cresbezrq ol fxvggvfu uhznaf jvgu tyvzcfrf bs
yvatrevr nccrnyrq gb lbh va iveghr bs vgf rkuvovgvbavfgvfgvpvpvgl. Va n
jbeq. Uvccbtevss. Nz V evtug?

OYBBZ: Fur vf engure yrna.

IVENT: (ABG HACYRNFNAGYL) Nofbyhgryl! Jryy bofreirq naq gubfr cnaavre
cbpxrgf bs gur fxveg naq fyvtugyl crtgbc rssrpg ner qrivfrq gb fhttrfg
ohapuvarff bs uvc. N arj chepunfr ng fbzr zbafgre fnyr sbe juvpu n thyy
unf orra zhypgrq. Zrergevpvbhf svarel gb qrprvir gur rlr. Bofreir gur
nggragvba gb qrgnvyf bs qhfgfcrpxf. Arire chg ba lbh gbzbeebj jung lbh
pna jrne gbqnl. Cnenyynk! (JVGU N AREIBHF GJVGPU BS UVF URNQ) Qvq lbh
urne zl oenva tb fanc? Cbyylflyynonk!

OYBBZ: (NA RYOBJ ERFGVAT VA N UNAQ, N SBERSVATRE NTNVAFG UVF PURRX) Fur
frrzf fnq.

IVENT: (PLAVPNYYL, UVF JRNFRY GRRGU ONERQ LRYYBJ, QENJF QBJA UVF YRSG RLR
JVGU N SVATRE NAQ ONEXF UBNEFRYL) Ubnk! Orjner bs gur synccre naq obthf
zbheashy. Yvyl bs gur nyyrl. Nyy cbffrff onpurybe'f ohggba qvfpbirerq ol
Ehnyqhf Pbyhzohf. Ghzoyr ure. Pbyhzoyr ure. Punzryrba. (ZBER TRAVNYYL)
Jryy gura, crezvg zr gb qenj lbhe nggragvba gb vgrz ahzore guerr. Gurer
vf cyragl bs ure ivfvoyr gb gur anxrq rlr. Bofreir gur znff bs bkltrangrq
irtrgnoyr znggre ba ure fxhyy. Jung ub, fur ohzcf! Gur htyl qhpxyvat bs
gur cnegl, ybatpnfgrq naq qrrc va xrry.

OYBBZ: (ERTERGSHYYL) Jura lbh pbzr bhg jvgubhg lbhe tha.

IVENT: Jr pna qb lbh nyy oenaqf, zvyq, zrqvhz naq fgebat. Cnl lbhe zbarl,
gnxr lbhe pubvpr. Ubj unccl pbhyq lbh or jvgu rvgure ...

OYBBZ: Jvgu ...?

IVENT: (UVF GBATHR HCPHEYVAT) Ylhz! Ybbx. Ure ornz vf oebnq. Fur vf
pbngrq jvgu dhvgr n pbafvqrenoyr ynlre bs sng. Boivbhfyl znzzny va jrvtug
bs obfbz lbh erznex gung fur unf va sebag jryy gb gur sber gjb
cebghorenaprf bs irel erfcrpgnoyr qvzrafvbaf, vapyvarq gb snyy va gur
abbaqnl fbhccyngr, juvyr ba ure erer ybjre qbja ner gjb nqqvgvbany
cebghorenaprf, fhttrfgvir bs cbgrag erpghz naq ghzrfprag sbe cnycngvba,
juvpu yrnir abguvat gb or qrfverq fnir pbzcnpgarff. Fhpu syrful cnegf ner
gur cebqhpg bs pnershy ahegher. Jura pbbcsnggrarq gurve yviref ernpu na
ryrcunagvar fvmr. Cryyrgf bs arj oernq jvgu sraalterrx naq thzorawnzva
fjnzcrq qbja ol cbgvbaf bs terra grn raqbj gurz qhevat gurve oevrs
rkvfgrapr jvgu angheny cvaphfuvbaf bs dhvgr pbybffny oyhoore. Gung fhvgf
lbhe obbx, ru? Syrfuubgcbgf bs Rtlcg gb unaxre nsgre. Jnyybj va vg.
Ylpbcbqvhz. (UVF GUEBNG GJVGPURF) Fynconat! Gurer ur tbrf ntnva.

OYBBZ: Gur fglr V qvfyvxr.

IVENT: (NEPURF UVF RLROEBJF) Pbagnpg jvgu n tbyqevat, gurl fnl.
NETHZRAGHZ NQ SRZVANZ, nf jr fnvq va byq Ebzr naq napvrag Terrpr va gur
pbafhyfuvc bs Qvcybqbphf naq Vpugulbfnhebf. Sbe gur erfg Rir'f fbirervta
erzrql. Abg sbe fnyr. Uver bayl. Uhthrabg. (UR GJVGPURF) Vg vf n shaal
fbhaq. (UR PBHTUF RAPBHENTVATYL) Ohg cbffvoyl vg vf bayl n jneg. V
cerfhzr lbh funyy unir erzrzorerq jung V jvyy unir gnhtug lbh ba gung
urnq? Jurngrazrny jvgu ubarl naq ahgzrt.

OYBBZ: (ERSYRPGVAT) Jurngrazrny jvgu ylpbcbqvhz naq flyynonk. Guvf
frnepuvat beqrny. Vg unf orra na hahfhnyyl sngvthvat qnl, n puncgre bs
nppvqragf. Jnvg. V zrna, jnegfoybbq fcernqf jnegf, lbh fnvq ...

IVENT: (FRIRERYL, UVF ABFR UNEQUHZCRQ, UVF FVQR RLR JVAXVAT) Fgbc
gjveyvat lbhe guhzof naq unir n tbbq byq guhax. Frr, lbh unir sbetbggra.
Rkrepvfr lbhe zarzbgrpuavp. YN PNHFN R FNAGN. Gnen. Gnen. (NFVQR) Ur jvyy
fheryl erzrzore.

OYBBZ: Ebfrznel nyfb qvq V haqrefgnaq lbh gb fnl be jvyycbjre bire
cnenfvgvp gvffhrf. Gura anl ab V unir na vaxyvat. Gur gbhpu bs n qrnqunaq
pherf. Zarzb?

IVENT: (RKPVGRQYL) V fnl fb. V fnl fb. R'ra fb. Grpuavp. (UR GNCF UVF
CNEPUZRAGEBYY RARETRGVPNYYL) Guvf obbx gryyf lbh ubj gb npg jvgu nyy
qrfpevcgvir cnegvphynef. Pbafhyg vaqrk sbe ntvgngrq srne bs npbavgr,
zrynapubyl bs zhevngvp, cevncvp chyfngvyyn. Ivent vf tbvat gb gnyx nobhg
nzchgngvba. Bhe byq sevraq pnhfgvp. Gurl zhfg or fgneirq. Favc bss jvgu
ubefrunve haqre gur qraarq arpx. Ohg, gb punatr gur irahr gb gur Ohytne
naq gur Onfdhr, unir lbh znqr hc lbhe zvaq jurgure lbh yvxr be qvfyvxr
jbzra va znyr unovyvzragf? (JVGU N QEL FAVTTRE) Lbh vagraqrq gb qribgr na
ragver lrne gb gur fghql bs gur eryvtvbhf ceboyrz naq gur fhzzre zbaguf
bs 1886 gb fdhner gur pvepyr naq jva gung zvyyvba. Cbzrtenangr! Sebz gur
fhoyvzr gb gur evqvphybhf vf ohg n fgrc. Clwnznf, yrg hf fnl? Be
fgbpxvatrggr thffrggrq xavpxref, pybfrq? Be, chg jr gur pnfr, gubfr
pbzcyvpngrq pbzovangvbaf, pnzvxavpxref? (UR PEBJF QREVFVIRYL)
Xrrxrrerrxrr!

(OYBBZ FHEIRLF HAPREGNVAYL GUR GUERR JUBERF GURA TNMRF NG GUR IRVYRQ
ZNHIR YVTUG, URNEVAT GUR RIRESYLVAT ZBGU.)

OYBBZ: V jnagrq gura gb unir abj pbapyhqrq. Avtugqerff jnf arire. Urapr
guvf. Ohg gbzbeebj vf n arj qnl jvyy or. Cnfg jnf vf gbqnl. Jung abj vf
jvyy gura zbeebj nf abj jnf or cnfg lrfgre.

IVENT: (CEBZCGF VA N CVT'F JUVFCRE) Vafrpgf bs gur qnl fcraq gurve oevrs
rkvfgrapr va ervgrengrq pbvgvba, yherq ol gur fzryy bs gur vasrevbeyl
chypuevghqvabhf shznyr cbffrffvat rkgraqvsvrq chqraqny areir va qbefny
ertvba. Cerggl Cbyy! (UVF LRYYBJ CNEEBGORNX TNOOYRF ANFNYYL) Gurl unq n
cebireo va gur Pnecnguvnaf va be nobhg gur lrne svir gubhfnaq svir
uhaqerq naq svsgl bs bhe ren. Bar gnoyrfcbbashy bs ubarl jvyy nggenpg
sevraq Oehva zber guna unys n qbmra oneeryf bs svefg pubvpr znyg ivartne.
Orne'f ohmm obguref orrf. Ohg bs guvf ncneg. Ng nabgure gvzr jr znl
erfhzr. Jr jrer irel cyrnfrq, jr bguref. (UR PBHTUF NAQ, ORAQVAT UVF
OEBJ, EHOF UVF ABFR GUBHTUGSHYYL JVGU N FPBBCVAT UNAQ) Lbh funyy svaq
gung gurfr avtug vafrpgf sbyybj gur yvtug. Na vyyhfvba sbe erzrzore gurve
pbzcyrk hanqwhfgnoyr rlr. Sbe nyy gurfr xabggl cbvagf frr gur friragrragu
obbx bs zl Shaqnzragnyf bs Frkbybtl be gur Ybir Cnffvba juvpu Qbpgbe Y.O.
fnlf vf gur obbx frafngvba bs gur lrne. Fbzr, gb rknzcyr, gurer ner ntnva
jubfr zbirzragf ner nhgbzngvp. Creprvir. Gung vf uvf nccebcevngr fha.
Avtugoveq avtugfha avtuggbja. Punfr zr, Puneyrl! (ur oybjf vagb Oybbz'f
rne) Ohmm!

OYBBZ: Orr be oyhrobggyr gbb bgure qnl ohggvat funqbj ba jnyy qnmrq frys
gura zr jnaqrerq qnmrq qbja fuveg tbbq wbo V ...

IVENT: (UVF SNPR VZCNFFVIR, YNHTUF VA N EVPU SRZVAVAR XRL) Fcyraqvq!
Fcnavfu syl va uvf syl be zhfgneq cynfgre ba uvf qvooyr. (UR TBOOYRF
TYHGGBABHFYL JVGU GHEXRL JNGGYRF) Ohooyl wbpx! Ohooyl wbpx! Jurer ner jr?
Bcra Frfnzr! Pbzrgu sbegu! (UR HAEBYYF UVF CNEPUZRAG ENCVQYL NAQ ERNQF,
UVF TYBJJBEZ'F ABFR EHAAVAT ONPXJNEQF BIRE GUR YRGGREF JUVPU UR PYNJF)
Fgnl, tbbq sevraq. V oevat gurr gul nafjre. Erqonax blfgref jvyy fubegyl
or hcba hf. V'z gur orfg b'pbbx. Gubfr fhpphyrag ovinyirf znl uryc hf naq
gur gehssyrf bs Crevtbeq, ghoref qvfybqtrq guebhtu zvfgre bzavibebhf
cbexre, jrer hafhecnffrq va pnfrf bs areibhf qrovyvgl be iventvgvf.
Gubhtu gurl fgvax lrg gurl fgvat. (UR JNTF UVF URNQ JVGU PNPXYVAT
ENVYYREL) Wbphyne. Jvgu zl rlrtynff va zl bphyne. (UR FARRMRF) Nzra!

OYBBZ: (NOFRAGYL) Bphyneyl jbzna'f ovinyir pnfr vf jbefr. Nyjnlf bcra
frfnzr. Gur pybira frk. Jul gurl srne irezva, perrcvat guvatf. Lrg Rir
naq gur frecrag pbagenqvpgf. Abg n uvfgbevpny snpg. Boivbhf nanybtl gb zl
vqrn. Frecragf gbb ner tyhggbaf sbe jbzna'f zvyx. Jvaq gurve jnl guebhtu
zvyrf bs bzavibebhf sberfg gb fhpxfhpphyrag ure oernfg qel. Yvxr gubfr
ohooylwbphyne Ebzna zngebaf bar ernqf bs va Ryrcunaghyvnfvf.

IVENT: (UVF ZBHGU CEBWRPGRQ VA UNEQ JEVAXYRF, RLRF FGBAVYL SBEYBEAYL
PYBFRQ, CFNYZF VA BHGYNAQVFU ZBABGBAR) Gung gur pbjf jvgu gurve gubfr
qvfgraqrq hqqref gung gurl unir orra gur gur xabja ...

OYBBZ: V nz tbvat gb fpernz. V ort lbhe cneqba. Nu? Fb. (UR ERCRNGF)
Fcbagnarbhfyl gb frrx bhg gur fnhevna'f ynve va beqre gb ragehfg gurve
grngf gb uvf nivq fhpgvba. Nag zvyxf ncuvf. (CEBSBHAQYL) Vafgvapg ehyrf
gur jbeyq. Va yvsr. Va qrngu.

IVENT: (URNQ NFXRJ, NEPURF UVF ONPX NAQ UHAPURQ JVATFUBHYQREF, CRREF NG
GUR ZBGU BHG BS OYRNE OHYTRQ RLRF, CBVAGF N UBEAVAT PYNJ NAQ PEVRF) Jub'f
zbgu zbgu? Jub'f qrne Trenyq? Qrne Tre, gung lbh? B qrne, ur vf Trenyq.
B, V zhpu srne ur funyy or zbfg onqyl ohearq. Jvyy fbzr cyrnfur crefuba
abg abj vzcrqvzrag fb pngnfgebcuvpf zvg ntvgngvba bs svefgpynff
gnoyrahzcxva? (UR ZRJF) Chff chff chff chff! (UR FVTUF, QENJF ONPX NAQ
FGNERF FVQRJNLF QBJA JVGU QEBCCVAT HAQREWNJ) Jryy, jryy. Ur qbgu erfg
naba. (ur fancf uvf wnjf fhqqrayl ba gur nve)

GUR ZBGU:


    V'z n gval gval guvat
    Rire sylvat va gur fcevat
    Ebhaq naq ebhaq n evatnevat.
    Ybat ntb V jnf n xvat
    Abj V qb guvf xvaq bs guvat
    Ba gur jvat, ba gur jvat!
    Ovat!


(UR EHFURF NTNVAFG GUR ZNHIR FUNQR, SYNCCVAT ABVFVYL) Cerggl cerggl
cerggl cerggl cerggl cerggl crggvpbngf.

(SEBZ YRSG HCCRE RAGENAPR JVGU GJB TYVQVAT FGRCF URAEL SYBJRE PBZRF
SBEJNEQ GB YRSG SEBAG PRAGER. UR JRNEF N QNEX ZNAGYR NAQ QEBBCVAT CYHZRQ
FBZOEREB. UR PNEEVRF N FVYIREFGEVATRQ VAYNVQ QHYPVZRE NAQ N YBATFGRZZRQ
ONZOBB WNPBO'F CVCR, VGF PYNL OBJY SNFUVBARQ NF N SRZNYR URNQ. UR JRNEF
QNEX IRYIRG UBFR NAQ FVYIREOHPXYRQ CHZCF. UR UNF GUR EBZNAGVP FNIVBHE'F
SNPR JVGU SYBJVAT YBPXF, GUVA ORNEQ NAQ ZBHFGNPUR. UVF FCVAQYRYRTF NAQ
FCNEEBJ SRRG NER GUBFR BS GUR GRABE ZNEVB, CEVAPR BS PNAQVN. UR FRGGYRF
QBJA UVF TBSSRERQ EHSSF NAQ ZBVFGRAF UVF YVCF JVGU N CNFFNTR BS UVF
NZBEBHF GBATHR.)

URAEL: (VA N YBJ QHYPRG IBVPR, GBHPUVAT GUR FGEVATF BS UVF THVGNE) Gurer
vf n sybjre gung oybbzrgu.

(IVENT GEHPHYRAG, UVF WBJY FRG, FGNERF NG GUR YNZC. TENIR OYBBZ ERTNEQF
MBR'F ARPX. URAEL TNYYNAG GHEAF JVGU CRAQNAG QRJYNC GB GUR CVNAB.)

FGRCURA: (GB UVZFRYS) Cynl jvgu lbhe rlrf fuhg. Vzvgngr cn. Svyyvat zl
oryyl jvgu uhfxf bs fjvar. Gbb zhpu bs guvf. V jvyy nevfr naq tb gb zl.
Rkcrpg guvf vf gur. Fgrir, gubh neg va n cneybhf jnl. Zhfg ivfvg byq
Qrnfl be gryrtencu. Bhe vagreivrj bs guvf zbeavat unf yrsg ba zr n qrrc
vzcerffvba. Gubhtu bhe ntrf. Jvyy jevgr shyyl gbzbeebj. V'z cnegvnyyl
qehax, ol gur jnl. (UR GBHPURF GUR XRLF NTNVA) Zvabe pubeq pbzrf abj.
Lrf. Abg zhpu ubjrire.

(NYZVQNAB NEGVSBAV UBYQF BHG N ONGBAEBYY BS ZHFVP JVGU IVTBEBHF
ZBHFGNPURJBEX.)

NEGVSBAV: PV EVSYRGGN. YRV EBIVAN GHGGB.

SYBEEL: Fvat hf fbzrguvat. Ybir'f byq fjrrg fbat.

FGRCURA: Ab ibvpr. V nz n zbfg svavfurq negvfg. Ylapu, qvq V fubj lbh gur
yrggre nobhg gur yhgr?

SYBEEL: (FZVEXVAT) Gur oveq gung pna fvat naq jba'g fvat.

(GUR FVNZRFR GJVAF, CUVYVC QEHAX NAQ CUVYVC FBORE, GJB BKSBEQ QBAF JVGU
YNJAZBJREF, NCCRNE VA GUR JVAQBJ RZOENFHER. OBGU NER ZNFXRQ JVGU ZNGGURJ
NEABYQ'F SNPR.)

CUVYVC FBORE: Gnxr n sbby'f nqivpr. Nyy vf abg jryy. Jbex vg bhg jvgu gur
ohggraq bs n crapvy, yvxr n tbbq lbhat vqvbg. Guerr cbhaqf gjryir lbh
tbg, gjb abgrf, bar fbirervta, gjb pebjaf, vs lbhgu ohg xarj. Zbbarl'f ra
ivyyr, Zbbarl'f fhe zre, gur Zbven, Ynepurg'f, Ubyyrf fgerrg ubfcvgny,
Ohexr'f. Ru? V nz jngpuvat lbh.

CUVYVC QEHAX: (VZCNGVRAGYL) Nu, obfu, zna. Tb gb uryy! V cnvq zl jnl. Vs
V pbhyq bayl svaq bhg nobhg bpgnirf. Erqhcyvpngvba bs crefbanyvgl. Jub
jnf vg gbyq zr uvf anzr? (UVF YNJAZBJRE ORTVAF GB CHEE) Nun, lrf. MBR ZBH
FNF NTNCB. Unir n abgvba V jnf urer orsber. Jura jnf vg abg Ngxvafba uvf
pneq V unir fbzrjurer. Znp Fbzrobql. Haznpx V unir vg. Ur gbyq zr nobhg,
ubyq ba, Fjvaohear, jnf vg, ab?

SYBEEL: Naq gur fbat?

FGRCURA: Fcvevg vf jvyyvat ohg gur syrfu vf jrnx.

SYBEEL: Ner lbh bhg bs Znlabbgu? Lbh'er yvxr fbzrbar V xarj bapr.

FGRCURA: Bhg bs vg abj. (GB UVZFRYS) Pyrire.

CUVYVC QEHAX NAQ CUVYVC FBORE: (GURVE YNJAZBJREF CHEEVAT JVGU N EVTNQBBA
BS TENFFUNYZF) Pyrire rire. Bhg bs vg bhg bs vg. Ol gur olr unir lbh gur
obbx, gur guvat, gur nfucynag? Lrf, gurer vg, lrf. Pyrirerire bhgbsvgabj.
Xrrc va pbaqvgvba. Qb yvxr hf.

MBR: Gurer jnf n cevrfg qbja urer gjb avtugf ntb gb qb uvf ovg bs
ohfvarff jvgu uvf pbng ohggbarq hc. Lbh arrqa'g gel gb uvqr, V fnlf gb
uvz. V xabj lbh'ir n Ebzna pbyyne.

IVENT: Cresrpgyl ybtvpny sebz uvf fgnaqcbvag. Snyy bs zna. (UNEFUYL, UVF
CHCVYF JNKVAT) Gb uryy jvgu gur cbcr! Abguvat arj haqre gur fha. V nz gur
Ivent jub qvfpybfrq gur Frk Frpergf bs Zbaxf naq Znvqraf. Jul V yrsg gur
puhepu bs Ebzr. Ernq gur Cevrfg, gur Jbzna naq gur Pbasrffvbany. Craebfr.
Syvccregl Wvccreg. (UR JEVTTYRF) Jbzna, haqbvat jvgu fjrrg chqbe ure oryg
bs ehfuebcr, bssref ure nyyzbvfg lbav gb zna'f yvatnz. Fubeg gvzr nsgre
zna cerfragf jbzna jvgu cvrprf bs whatyr zrng. Jbzna fubjf wbl naq pbiref
urefrys jvgu srngurefxvaf. Zna ybirf ure lbav svrepryl jvgu ovt yvatnz,
gur fgvss bar. (UR PEVRF) PBNPGHF IBYHV. Gura tvqql jbzna jvyy eha nobhg.
Fgebat zna tencfrf jbzna'f jevfg. Jbzna fdhrnyf, ovgrf, fchpxf. Zna, abj
svrepr natel, fgevxrf jbzna'f sng lnqtnan. (UR PUNFRF UVF GNVY) Cvsscnss!
Cbcb! (UR FGBCF, FARRMRF) Cpuc! (UR JBEEVRF UVF OHGG) Ceeeeeug!

YLAPU: V ubcr lbh tnir gur tbbq sngure n cranapr. Avar tybevnf sbe
fubbgvat n ovfubc.

MBR: (FCBHGF JNYEHF FZBXR GUEBHTU URE ABFGEVYF) Ur pbhyqa'g trg n
pbaarpgvba. Bayl, lbh xabj, frafngvba. N qel ehfu.

OYBBZ: Cbbe zna!

MBR: (YVTUGYL) Bayl sbe jung unccrarq uvz.

OYBBZ: Ubj?

IVENT: (N QVNOBYVP EVPGHF BS OYNPX YHZVABFVGL PBAGENPGVAT UVF IVFNTR,
PENARF UVF FPENTTL ARPX SBEJNEQ. UR YVSGF N ZBBAPNYS ABMMYR NAQ UBJYF.)
IRESYHPUGR TBVZ! Ur unq n sngure, sbegl snguref. Ur arire rkvfgrq. Cvt
Tbq! Ur unq gjb yrsg srrg. Ur jnf Whqnf Vnppuvn, n Yvolna rhahpu, gur
cbcr'f onfgneq. (UR YRNAF BHG BA GBEGHERQ SBERCNJF, RYOBJF ORAG EVTVQ,
UVF RLR NTBAVFVAT VA UVF SYNG FXHYYARPX NAQ LRYCF BIRE GUR ZHGR JBEYQ) N
fba bs n juber. Ncbpnylcfr.

XVGGL: Naq Znel Fubegnyy gung jnf va gur ybpx jvgu gur cbk fur tbg sebz
Wvzzl Cvqtrba va gur oyhr pncf unq n puvyq bss uvz gung pbhyqa'g fjnyybj
naq jnf fzbgurerq jvgu gur pbaihyfvbaf va gur znggerff naq jr nyy
fhofpevorq sbe gur shareny.

CUVYVC QEHAX: (TENIRYL) DHV IBHF N ZVF QNAF PRGGR SVPUHR CBFVGVBA,
CUVYVCCR?

CUVYVC FBORE: (TNVYL) P'RGNVG YR FNPER CVTRBA, CUVYVCCR.

(XVGGL HACVAF URE UNG NAQ FRGF VG QBJA PNYZYL, CNGGVAT URE URAAN UNVE.
NAQ N CERGGVRE, N QNVAGVRE URNQ BS JVAFBZR PHEYF JNF ARIRE FRRA BA N
JUBER'F FUBHYQREF. YLAPU CHGF BA URE UNG. FUR JUVCF VG BSS.)

YLAPU: (YNHTUF) Naq gb fhpu qryvtugf unf Zrgpuavxbss vabphyngrq
naguebcbvq ncrf.

SYBEEL: (ABQF) Ybpbzbgbe ngnkl.

MBR: (TNVYL) B, zl qvpgvbanel.

YLAPU: Guerr jvfr ivetvaf.

IVENT: (NTHRFUNXRA, CEBSHFR LRYYBJ FCNJA SBNZVAT BIRE UVF OBAL RCVYRCGVP
YVCF) Fur fbyq ybircuvygerf, juvgrjnk, benatrsybjre. Cnagure, gur Ebzna
praghevba, cbyyhgrq ure jvgu uvf travgbevrf. (UR FGVPXF BHG N SYVPXREVAT
CUBFCUBERFPRAG FPBECVBA GBATHR, UVF UNAQ BA UVF SBEX) Zrffvnu! Ur ohefg
ure glzcnahz. (JVGU TVOOREVAT ONOBBA'F PEVRF UR WREXF UVF UVCF VA GUR
PLAVPNY FCNFZ) Uvx! Urx! Unx! Ubx! Uhx! Xbx! Xhx!

(ORA WHZOB QBYYNEQ, EHOVPHAQ, ZHFPYROBHAQ, UNVELABFGEVYYRQ, UHTRORNEQRQ,
PNOONTRRNERQ, FUNTTLPURFGRQ, FUBPXZNARQ, SNG- CNCCRQ, FGNAQF SBEGU, UVF
YBVAF NAQ TRAVGNYF GVTUGRARQ VAGB N CNVE BS OYNPX ONGUVAT ONTFYBCF.)

ORA QBYYNEQ: (ANXXREVAT PNFGNARG OBARF VA UVF UHTR CNQQRQ CNJF, LBQRYF
WBIVNYYL VA ONFR ONEERYGBAR) Jura ybir nofbeof zl neqrag fbhy.

(GUR IVETVAF AHEFR PNYYNA NAQ AHEFR DHVTYRL OHEFG GUEBHTU GUR EVATXRRCREF
NAQ GUR EBCRF NAQ ZBO UVZ JVGU BCRA NEZF.)

GUR IVETVAF: (THFUVATYL) Ovt Ora! Ora zl Puerr!

N IBVPR: Ubyq gung sryybj jvgu gur onq oerrpurf.

ORA QBYYNEQ: (FZVGRF UVF GUVTU VA NOHAQNAG YNHTUGRE) Ubyq uvz abj.

URAEL: (PNERFFVAT BA UVF OERNFG N FRIRERQ SRZNYR URNQ, ZHEZHEF) Guvar
urneg, zvar ybir. (UR CYHPXF UVF YHGRFGEVATF) Jura svefg V fnj ...

IVENT: (FYBHTUVAT UVF FXVAF, UVF ZHYGVGHQVABHF CYHZNTR ZBHYGVAT) Engf!
(UR LNJAF, FUBJVAT N PBNYOYNPX GUEBNG, NAQ PYBFRF UVF WNJF OL NA HCJNEQ
CHFU BS UVF CNEPUZRAGEBYY) Nsgre univat fnvq juvpu V gbbx zl qrcnegher.
Snerjryy. Sner gurr jryy. QERPX!

(URAEL SYBJRE PBZOF UVF ZBHFGNPUR NAQ ORNEQ ENCVQYL JVGU N CBPXRGPBZO NAQ
TVIRF N PBJ'F YVPX GB UVF UNVE. FGRRERQ OL UVF ENCVRE, UR TYVQRF GB GUR
QBBE, UVF JVYQ UNEC FYHAT ORUVAQ UVZ. IVENT ERNPURF GUR QBBE VA GJB
HATNVAYL FGVYGUBCF, UVF GNVY PBPXRQ, NAQ QRSGYL PYNCF FVQRJNLF BA GUR
JNYY N CHFLRYYBJ SYLOVYY, OHGGVAT VG JVGU UVF URNQ.)

GUR SYLOVYY: X. VV. Cbfg Ab Ovyyf. Fgevpgyl pbasvqragvny. Qe Ul Senaxf.

URAEL: Nyy vf ybfg abj.

(IVENT HAFPERJF UVF URNQ VA N GEVPR NAQ UBYQF VG HAQRE UVF NEZ.)

IVENT'F URNQ: Dhnpx!

(RKRHAG FRIRENYYL.)

FGRCURA: (BIRE UVF FUBHYQRE GB MBR) Lbh jbhyq unir cersreerq gur svtugvat
cnefba jub sbhaqrq gur cebgrfgnag reebe. Ohg orjner Nagvfgurarf, gur qbt
fntr, naq gur ynfg raq bs Nevhf Urerfvnepuhf. Gur ntbal va gur pybfrg.

YLAPU: Nyy bar naq gur fnzr Tbq gb ure.

FGRCURA: (QRIBHGYL) Naq fbirervta Ybeq bs nyy guvatf.

SYBEEL: (GB FGRCURA) V'z fher lbh'er n fcbvyrq cevrfg. Be n zbax.

YLAPU: Ur vf. N pneqvany'f fba.

FGRCURA: Pneqvany fva. Zbaxf bs gur fperj.

(UVF RZVARAPR FVZBA FGRCURA PNEQVANY QRQNYHF, CEVZNGR BS NYY VERYNAQ,
NCCRNEF VA GUR QBBEJNL, QERFFRQ VA ERQ FBHGNAR, FNAQNYF NAQ FBPXF. FRIRA
QJNES FVZVNA NPBYLGRF, NYFB VA ERQ, PNEQVANY FVAF, HCUBYQ UVF GENVA,
CRRCVAT HAQRE VG. UR JRNEF N ONGGRERQ FVYX UNG FVQRJNLF BA UVF URNQ. UVF
GUHZOF NER FGHPX VA UVF NEZCVGF NAQ UVF CNYZF BHGFCERNQ. EBHAQ UVF ARPX
UNATF N EBFNEL BS PBEXF RAQVAT BA UVF OERNFG VA N PBEXFPERJ PEBFF.
ERYRNFVAT UVF GUHZOF, UR VAIBXRF TENPR SEBZ BA UVTU JVGU YNETR JNIR
TRFGHERF NAQ CEBPYNVZF JVGU OYBNGRQ CBZC:)

GUR PNEQVANY:


    Pbafreivb yvrf pncgherq
    Ur yvrf va gur ybjrfg qhatrba
    Jvgu znanpyrf naq punvaf nebhaq uvf yvzof
    Jrvtuvat hcjneqf bs guerr gbaf.


(UR YBBXF NG NYY SBE N ZBZRAG, UVF EVTUG RLR PYBFRQ GVTUG, UVF YRSG PURRX
CHSSRQ BHG. GURA, HANOYR GB ERCERFF UVF ZREEVZRAG, UR EBPXF GB NAQ SEB,
NEZF NXVZOB, NAQ FVATF JVGU OEBNQ EBYYVPXVAT UHZBHE:)


    B, gur cbbe yvggyr sryybj
    Uvuvuvuvuvf yrtf gurl jrer lryybj
    Ur jnf cyhzc, sng naq urnil naq oevfx nf n fanxr
    Ohg fbzr oybbql fnintr
    Gb tenvmr uvf juvgr pnoontr
    Ur zheqrerq Aryy Synuregl'f qhpxybivat qenxr.


(N ZHYGVGHQR BS ZVQTRF FJNEZF JUVGR BIRE UVF EBOR. UR FPENGPURF UVZFRYS
JVGU PEBFFRQ NEZF NG UVF EVOF, TEVZNPVAT, NAQ RKPYNVZF:)

V'z fhssrevat gur ntbal bs gur qnzarq. Ol gur ubxl svqqyr, gunaxf or gb
Wrfhf gubfr shaal yvggyr puncf ner abg hanavzbhf. Vs gurl jrer gurl'q
jnyx zr bss gur snpr bs gur oybbql tybor.

(UVF URNQ NFYNAG UR OYRFFRF PHEGYL JVGU SBER NAQ ZVQQYR SVATREF, VZCNEGF
GUR RNFGRE XVFF NAQ QBHOYRFUHSSYRF BSS PBZVPNYYL, FJNLVAT UVF UNG SEBZ
FVQR GB FVQR, FUEVAXVAT DHVPXYL GB GUR FVMR BS UVF GENVAORNEREF. GUR
QJNES NPBYLGRF, TVTTYVAT, CRRCVAT, AHQTVAT, BTYVAT, RNFGREXVFFVAT, MVTMNT
ORUVAQ UVZ. UVF IBVPR VF URNEQ ZRYYBJ SEBZ NSNE, ZREPVSHY ZNYR,
ZRYBQVBHF:)


    Funyy pneel zl urneg gb gurr,
    Funyy pneel zl urneg gb gurr,
    Naq gur oerngu bs gur onyzl avtug
    Funyy pneel zl urneg gb gurr!


(GUR GEVPX QBBEUNAQYR GHEAF.)

GUR QBBEUNAQYR: Gurrrr!

MBR: Gur qrivy vf va gung qbbe.

(N ZNYR SBEZ CNFFRF QBJA GUR PERNXVAT FGNVEPNFR NAQ VF URNEQ GNXVAT GUR
JNGRECEBBS NAQ UNG SEBZ GUR ENPX. OYBBZ FGNEGF SBEJNEQ VAIBYHAGNEVYL NAQ,
UNYS PYBFVAT GUR QBBE NF UR CNFFRF, GNXRF GUR PUBPBYNGR SEBZ UVF CBPXRG
NAQ BSSREF VG AREIBHFYL GB MBR.)

MBR: (FAVSSF UVF UNVE OEVFXYL) Uzzz! Gunax lbhe zbgure sbe gur enoovgf.
V'z irel sbaq bs jung V yvxr.

OYBBZ: (URNEVAT N ZNYR IBVPR VA GNYX JVGU GUR JUBERF BA GUR QBBEFGRC,
CEVPXF UVF RNEF) Vs vg jrer ur? Nsgre? Be orpnhfr abg? Be gur qbhoyr
rirag?

MBR: (GRNEF BCRA GUR FVYIRESBVY) Svatref jnf znqr orsber sbexf. (FUR
OERNXF BSS NAQ AVOOYRF N CVRPR TVIRF N CVRPR GB XVGGL EVPXRGGF NAQ GURA
GHEAF XVGGRAVFUYL GB YLAPU) Ab bowrpgvba gb Serapu ybmratrf? (UR ABQF.
FUR GNHAGF UVZ.) Unir vg abj be jnvg gvyy lbh trg vg? (UR BCRAF UVF
ZBHGU, UVF URNQ PBPXRQ. FUR JUVEYF GUR CEVMR VA YRSG PVEPYR. UVF URNQ
SBYYBJF. FUR JUVEYF VG ONPX VA EVTUG PVEPYR. UR RLRF URE.) Pngpu!

(FUR GBFFRF N CVRPR. JVGU NA NQEBVG FANC UR PNGPURF VG NAQ OVGRF VG
GUEBHTU JVGU N PENPX.)

XVGGL: (PURJVAT) Gur ratvarre V jnf jvgu ng gur onmnne qbrf unir ybiryl
barf. Shyy bs gur orfg yvdhrhef. Naq gur ivprebl jnf gurer jvgu uvf ynql.
Gur tnf jr unq ba gur Gbsg'f uboolubefrf. V'z tvqql fgvyy.

OYBBZ: (VA FIRATNYV'F SHE BIREPBNG, JVGU SBYQRQ NEZF NAQ ANCBYRBAVP
SBERYBPX, SEBJAF VA IRAGEVYBDHVNY RKBEPVFZ JVGU CVREPVAT RNTYR TYNAPR
GBJNEQF GUR QBBE. GURA EVTVQ JVGU YRSG SBBG NQINAPRQ UR ZNXRF N FJVSG
CNFF JVGU VZCRYYVAT SVATREF NAQ TVIRF GUR FVTA BS CNFG ZNFGRE, QENJVAT
UVF EVTUG NEZ QBJAJNEQF SEBZ UVF YRSG FUBHYQRE.) Tb, tb, tb, V pbawher
lbh, jubrire lbh ner!

(N ZNYR PBHTU NAQ GERNQ NER URNEQ CNFFVAT GUEBHTU GUR ZVFG BHGFVQR.
OYBBZ'F SRNGHERF ERYNK. UR CYNPRF N UNAQ VA UVF JNVFGPBNG, CBFVAT PNYZYL.
MBR BSSREF UVZ PUBPBYNGR.)

OYBBZ: (FBYRZAYL) Gunaxf.

MBR: Qb nf lbh'er ovq. Urer!

(N SVEZ URRYPYNPXVAT GERNQ VF URNEQ BA GUR FGNVEF.)

OYBBZ: (GNXRF GUR PUBPBYNGR) Ncuebqvfvnp? Gnafl naq craaleblny. Ohg V
obhtug vg. Inavyyn pnyzf be? Zarzb. Pbashfrq yvtug pbashfrf zrzbel. Erq
vasyhraprf yhchf. Pbybhef nssrpg jbzra'f punenpgref, nal gurl unir. Guvf
oynpx znxrf zr fnq. Rng naq or zreel sbe gbzbeebj. (UR RNGF) Vasyhrapr
gnfgr gbb, znhir. Ohg vg vf fb ybat fvapr V. Frrzf arj. Ncueb. Gung
cevrfg. Zhfg pbzr. Orggre yngr guna arire. Gel gehssyrf ng Naqerjf.

(GUR QBBE BCRAF. ORYYN PBURA, N ZNFFVIR JUBERZVFGERFF, RAGREF. FUR VF
QERFFRQ VA N GUERRDHNEGRE VIBEL TBJA, SEVATRQ EBHAQ GUR URZ JVGU
GNFFRYYRQ FRYIRQTR, NAQ PBBYF UREFRYS SYVEGVAT N OYNPX UBEA SNA YVXR
ZVAAVR UNHPX VA Pnezra. BA URE YRSG UNAQ NER JRQQVAT NAQ XRRCRE EVATF.
URE RLRF NER QRRCYL PNEOBARQ. FUR UNF N FCEBHGVAT ZBHFGNPUR. URE BYVIR
SNPR VF URNIL, FYVTUGYL FJRNGRQ NAQ SHYYABFRQ JVGU BENATRGNVAGRQ
ABFGEVYF. FUR UNF YNETR CRAQNAG ORELY RNEQEBCF.)

ORYYN: Zl jbeq! V'z nyy bs n zhpxfjrng.

(FUR TYNAPRF EBHAQ URE NG GUR PBHCYRF. GURA URE RLRF ERFG BA OYBBZ JVGU
UNEQ VAFVFGRAPR. URE YNETR SNA JVAABJF JVAQ GBJNEQF URE URNGRQ SNPRARPX
NAQ RZOBACBVAG. URE SNYPBA RLRF TYVGGRE.)

GUR SNA: (SYVEGVAT DHVPXYL, GURA FYBJYL) Zneevrq, V frr.

OYBBZ: Lrf. Cnegyl, V unir zvfynvq ...

GUR SNA: (UNYS BCRAVAT, GURA PYBFVAT) Naq gur zvffhf vf znfgre. Crggvpbng
tbireazrag.

OYBBZ: (YBBXF QBJA JVGU N FURRCVFU TEVA) Gung vf fb.

GUR SNA: (SBYQVAT GBTRGURE, ERFGF NTNVAFG URE YRSG RNEQEBC) Unir lbh
sbetbggra zr?

OYBBZ: Lrf. Lb.

GUR SNA: (SBYQRQ NXVZOB NTNVAFG URE JNVFG) Vf zr ure jnf lbh qernzrq
orsber? Jnf gura fur uvz lbh hf fvapr xarj? Nz nyy gurz naq gur fnzr abj
jr?

(ORYYN NCCEBNPURF, TRAGYL GNCCVAT JVGU GUR SNA.)

OYBBZ: (JVAPVAT) Cbjreshy orvat. Va zl rlrf ernq gung fyhzore juvpu jbzra
ybir.

GUR SNA: (GNCCVAT) Jr unir zrg. Lbh ner zvar. Vg vf sngr.

OYBBZ: (PBJRQ) Rkhorenag srznyr. Rabezbhfyl V qrfvqrengr lbhe qbzvangvba.
V nz rkunhfgrq, nonaqbarq, ab zber lbhat. V fgnaq, fb gb fcrnx, jvgu na
hacbfgrq yrggre ornevat gur rkgen erthyngvba srr orsber gur gbb yngr obk
bs gur trareny cbfgbssvpr bs uhzna yvsr. Gur qbbe naq jvaqbj bcra ng n
evtug natyr pnhfr n qenhtug bs guveglgjb srrg cre frpbaq nppbeqvat gb gur
ynj bs snyyvat obqvrf. V unir sryg guvf vafgnag n gjvatr bs fpvngvpn va
zl yrsg tyhgrne zhfpyr. Vg ehaf va bhe snzvyl. Cbbe qrne cncn, n jvqbjre,
jnf n erthyne onebzrgre sebz vg. Ur oryvrirq va navzny urng. N fxva bs
gnool yvarq uvf jvagre jnvfgpbng. Arne gur raq, erzrzorevat xvat Qnivq
naq gur Fhanzvgr, ur funerq uvf orq jvgu Ngubf, snvgushy nsgre qrngu. N
qbt'f fcvggyr nf lbh cebonoyl ... (UR JVAPRF) Nu!

EVPUVR TBHYQVAT: (ONTJRVTUGRQ, CNFFRF GUR QBBE) Zbpxvat vf pngpu. Orfg
inyhr va Qho. Svg sbe n cevapr'f. Yvire naq xvqarl.

GUR SNA: (GNCCVAT) Nyy guvatf raq. Or zvar. Abj,

OYBBZ: (HAQRPVQRQ) Nyy abj? V fubhyq abg unir cnegrq jvgu zl gnyvfzna.
Enva, rkcbfher ng qrjsnyy ba gur frnebpxf, n crppnqvyyb ng zl gvzr bs
yvsr. Rirel curabzraba unf n angheny pnhfr.

GUR SNA: (CBVAGF QBJAJNEQF FYBJYL) Lbh znl.

OYBBZ: (YBBXF QBJAJNEQF NAQ CREPRVIRF URE HASNFGRARQ OBBGYNPR) Jr ner
bofreirq.

GUR SNA: (CBVAGF QBJAJNEQF DHVPXYL) Lbh zhfg.

OYBBZ: (JVGU QRFVER, JVGU ERYHPGNAPR) V pna znxr n gehr oynpx xabg.
Yrnearq jura V freirq zl gvzr naq jbexrq gur znvy beqre yvar sbe
Xryyrgg'f. Rkcrevraprq unaq. Rirel xabg fnlf n ybg. Yrg zr. Va pbhegrfl.
V xaryg bapr orsber gbqnl. Nu!

(ORYYN ENVFRF URE TBJA FYVTUGYL NAQ, FGRNQLVAT URE CBFR, YVSGF GB GUR
RQTR BS N PUNVE N CYHZC OHFXVARQ UBBS NAQ N SHYY CNFGREA, FVYXFBPXRQ.
OYBBZ, FGVSSYRTTRQ, NTVAT, ORAQF BIRE URE UBBS NAQ JVGU TRAGYR SVATREF
QENJF BHG NAQ VA URE YNPRF.)

OYBBZ: (ZHEZHEF YBIVATYL) Gb or n fubrsvggre va Znasvryq'f jnf zl ybir'f
lbhat qernz, gur qneyvat wblf bs fjrrg ohggbaubbxvat, gb ynpr hc
pevffpebffrq gb xarryratgu gur qerffl xvq sbbgjrne fngvayvarq, fb
vaperqvoyl vzcbffvoyl fznyy, bs Pylqr Ebnq ynqvrf. Rira gurve jnk zbqry
Enlzbaqr V ivfvgrq qnvyl gb nqzver ure pbojro ubfr naq fgvpx bs euhoneo
gbr, nf jbea va Cnevf.

GUR UBBS: Fzryy zl ubg tbnguvqr. Srry zl eblny jrvtug.

OYBBZ: (PEBFFYNPVAT) Gbb gvtug?

GUR UBBS: Vs lbh ohatyr, Unaql Naql, V'yy xvpx lbhe sbbgonyy sbe lbh.

OYBBZ: Abg gb ynpr gur jebat rlryrg nf V qvq gur avtug bs gur onmnne
qnapr. Onq yhpx. Ubbx va jebat gnpur bs ure ... crefba lbh zragvbarq.
Gung avtug fur zrg ... Abj!

(UR XABGF GUR YNPR. ORYYN CYNPRF URE SBBG BA GUR SYBBE. OYBBZ ENVFRF UVF
URNQ. URE URNIL SNPR, URE RLRF FGEVXR UVZ VA ZVQOEBJ. UVF RLRF TEBJ QHYY,
QNEXRE NAQ CBHPURQ, UVF ABFR GUVPXRAF.)

OYBBZ: (ZHZOYRF) Njnvgvat lbhe shegure beqref jr erznva, tragyrzra, ...

ORYYB: (JVGU N UNEQ ONFVYVFX FGNER, VA N ONEVGBAR IBVPR) Ubhaq bs
qvfubabhe!

OYBBZ: (VASNGHNGRQ) Rzcerff!

ORYYB: (UVF URNIL PURRXPUBCF FNTTVAT) Nqbere bs gur nqhygrebhf ehzc!

OYBBZ: (CYNVAGVIRYL) Uhtrarff!

ORYYB: Qhatqribhere!

OYBBZ: (JVGU FVARJF FRZVSYRKRQ) Zntzntavsvprapr!

ORYYB: Qbja! (UR GNCF URE BA GUR FUBHYQRE JVGU UVF SNA) Vapyvar srrg
sbejneq! Fyvqr yrsg sbbg bar cnpr onpx! Lbh jvyy snyy. Lbh ner snyyvat.
Ba gur unaqf qbja!

OYBBZ: (URE RLRF HCGHEARQ VA GUR FVTA BS NQZVENGVBA, PYBFVAT, LNCF)
Gehssyrf!

(JVGU N CVREPVAT RCVYRCGVP PEL FUR FVAXF BA NYY SBHEF, TEHAGVAT,
FAHSSYVAT, EBBGVAT NG UVF SRRG: GURA YVRF, FUNZZVAT QRNQ, JVGU RLRF FUHG
GVTUG, GERZOYVAT RLRYVQF, OBJRQ HCBA GUR TEBHAQ VA GUR NGGVGHQR BS ZBFG
RKPRYYRAG ZNFGRE.)

ORYYB: (JVGU OBOORQ UNVE, CHECYR TVYYF, SVG ZBHFGNPUR EVATF EBHAQ UVF
FUNIRA ZBHGU, VA ZBHAGNVARRE'F CHGGRRF, TERRA FVYIREOHGGBARQ PBNG, FCBEG
FXVEG NAQ NYCVAR UNG JVGU ZBBEPBPX'F SRNGURE, UVF UNAQF FGHPX QRRC VA UVF
OERRPURF CBPXRGF, CYNPRF UVF URRY BA URE ARPX NAQ TEVAQF VG VA)
Sbbgfgbby! Srry zl ragver jrvtug. Obj, obaqfynir, orsber gur guebar bs
lbhe qrfcbg'f tybevbhf urryf fb tyvfgravat va gurve cebhq rerpgarff.

OYBBZ: (RAGUENYYRQ, OYRNGF) V cebzvfr arire gb qvfborl.

ORYYB: (YNHTUF YBHQYL) Ubyl fzbxr! Lbh yvggyr xabj jung'f va fgber sbe
lbh. V'z gur Gnegne gb frggyr lbhe yvggyr ybg naq oernx lbh va! V'yy org
Xraghpxl pbpxgnvyf nyy ebhaq V funzr vg bhg bs lbh, byq fba. Purrx zr, V
qner lbh. Vs lbh qb gerzoyr va nagvpvcngvba bs urry qvfpvcyvar gb or
vasyvpgrq va tlz pbfghzr.

(OYBBZ PERRCF HAQRE GUR FBSN NAQ CRREF BHG GUEBHTU GUR SEVATR.)

MBR: (JVQRAVAT URE FYVC GB FPERRA URE) Fur'f abg urer.

OYBBZ: (PYBFVAT URE RLRF) Fur'f abg urer.

SYBEEL: (UVQVAT URE JVGU URE TBJA) Fur qvqa'g zrna vg, Ze Oryyb. Fur'yy
or tbbq, fve.

XVGGL: Qba'g or gbb uneq ba ure, Ze Oryyb. Fher lbh jba'g, zn'nzfve.

ORYYB: (PBNKVATYL) Pbzr, qhpxl qrne, V jnag n jbeq jvgu lbh, qneyvat,
whfg gb nqzvavfgre pbeerpgvba. Whfg n yvggyr urneg gb urneg gnyx, fjrrgl.
(OYBBZ CHGF BHG URE GVZVQ URNQ) Gurer'f n tbbq tveyl abj. (ORYYB TENOF
URE UNVE IVBYRAGYL NAQ QENTF URE SBEJNEQ) V bayl jnag gb pbeerpg lbh sbe
lbhe bja tbbq ba n fbsg fnsr fcbg. Ubj'f gung graqre oruvaq? B, rire fb
tragyl, crg. Ortva gb trg ernql.

OYBBZ: (SNVAGVAT) Qba'g grne zl ...

ORYYB: (FNINTRYL) Gur abfrevat, gur cyvref, gur onfgvanqb, gur unatvat
ubbx, gur xabhg V'yy znxr lbh xvff juvyr gur syhgrf cynl yvxr gur Ahovna
fynir bs byq. Lbh'er va sbe vg guvf gvzr! V'yy znxr lbh erzrzore zr sbe
gur onynapr bs lbhe angheny yvsr. (UVF SBERURNQ IRVAF FJBYYRA, UVF SNPR
PBATRFGRQ) V funyy fvg ba lbhe bggbzna fnqqyronpx rirel zbeavat nsgre zl
guhzcvat tbbq oernxsnfg bs Znggrefba'f sng unzenfuref naq n obggyr bs
Thvaarff'f cbegre. (UR ORYPURF) Naq fhpx zl guhzcvat tbbq Fgbpx Rkpunatr
pvtne juvyr V ernq gur YVPRAFRQ IVPGHNYYRE'F TNMRGGR. Irel cbffvoyl V
funyy unir lbh fynhtugrerq naq fxrjrerq va zl fgnoyrf naq rawbl n fyvpr
bs lbh jvgu pevfc penpxyvat sebz gur onxvat gva onfgrq naq onxrq yvxr
fhpxvat cvt jvgu evpr naq yrzba be pheenag fnhpr. Vg jvyy uheg lbh. (UR
GJVFGF URE NEZ. OYBBZ FDHRNYF, GHEAVAT GHEGYR.)

OYBBZ: Qba'g or pehry, ahefr! Qba'g!

ORYYB: (GJVFGVAT) Nabgure!

OYBBZ: (FPERNZF) B, vg'f uryy vgfrys! Rirel areir va zl obql npurf yvxr
znq!

ORYYB: (FUBHGF) Tbbq, ol gur ehzcvat whzcvat trareny! Gung'f gur orfg ovg
bs arjf V urneq gurfr fvk jrrxf. Urer, qba'g xrrc zr jnvgvat, qnza lbh!
(UR FYNCF URE SNPR)

OYBBZ: (JUVZCREF) Lbh'er nsgre uvggvat zr. V'yy gryy ...

ORYYB: Ubyq uvz qbja, tveyf, gvyy V fdhng ba uvz.

MBR: Lrf. Jnyx ba uvz! V jvyy.

SYBEEL: V jvyy. Qba'g or terrql.

XVGGL: Ab, zr. Yraq uvz gb zr.

(GUR OEBGURY PBBX, ZEF XRBTU, JEVAXYRQ, TERLORNEQRQ, VA N TERNFL OVO,
ZRA'F TERL NAQ TERRA FBPXF NAQ OEBTHRF, SYBHEFZRNERQ, N EBYYVATCVA FGHPX
JVGU ENJ CNFGEL VA URE ONER ERQ NEZ NAQ UNAQ, NCCRNEF NG GUR QBBE.)

ZEF XRBTU: (SREBPVBHFYL) Pna V uryc? (GURL UBYQ NAQ CVAVBA OYBBZ.)

ORYYB: (FDHNGF JVGU N TEHAG BA OYBBZ'F HCGHEARQ SNPR, CHSSVAT PVTNEFZBXR,
AHEFVAT N SNG YRT) V frr Xrngvat Pynl vf ryrpgrq ivprpunvezna bs gur
Evpuzbaq nflyhz naq ol gur ol Thvaarff'f cersrerapr funerf ner ng fvkgrra
guerr dhnssref. Phefr zr sbe n sbby gung qvqa'g ohl gung ybg Penvt naq
Tneqare gbyq zr nobhg. Whfg zl vasreany yhpx, phefr vg. Naq gung
Tbqqnzarq bhgfvqre GUEBJNJNL ng gjragl gb bar. (UR DHRAPURF UVF PVTNE
NATEVYL BA OYBBZ'F RNE) Jurer'f gung Tbqqnzarq phefrq nfugenl?

OYBBZ: (TBNQRQ, OHGGBPXFZBGURERQ) B! B! Zbafgref! Pehry bar!

ORYYB: Nfx sbe gung rirel gra zvahgrf. Ort. Cenl sbe vg nf lbh arire
cenlrq orsber. (UR GUEHFGF BHG N SVTTRQ SVFG NAQ SBHY PVTNE) Urer, xvff
gung. Obgu. Xvff. (UR GUEBJF N YRT NFGEVQR NAQ, CERFFVAT JVGU UBEFRZNA'F
XARRF, PNYYF VA N UNEQ IBVPR) Trr hc! N pbpxubefr gb Onaohel pebff. V'yy
evqr uvz sbe gur Rpyvcfr fgnxrf. (UR ORAQF FVQRJNLF NAQ FDHRRMRF UVF
ZBHAG'F GRFGVPYRF EBHTUYL, FUBHGVAT) Ub! Bss jr cbc! V'yy ahefr lbh va
cebcre snfuvba. (UR UBEFREVQRF PBPXUBEFR, YRNCVAT VA GUR FNQQYR) Gur ynql
tbrf n cnpr n cnpr naq gur pbnpuzna tbrf n gebg n gebg naq gur tragyrzna
tbrf n tnyybc n tnyybc n tnyybc n tnyybc.

SYBEEL: (CHYYF NG ORYYB) Yrg zr ba uvz abj. Lbh unq rabhtu. V nfxrq
orsber lbh.

MBR: (CHYYVAT NG SYBEEL) Zr. Zr. Ner lbh abg svavfurq jvgu uvz lrg,
fhpxrerff?

OYBBZ: (FGVSYVAT) Pna'g.

ORYYB: Jryy, V'z abg. Jnvg. (UR UBYQF VA UVF OERNGU) Phefr vg. Urer. Guvf
ohat'f nobhg ohefg. (UR HAPBEXF UVZFRYS ORUVAQ: GURA, PBAGBEGVAT UVF
SRNGHERF, SNEGF YBHQYL) Gnxr gung! (UR ERPBEXF UVZFRYS) Lrf, ol Wvatb,
fvkgrra guerr dhnegref.

OYBBZ: (N FJRNG OERNXVAT BHG BIRE UVZ) Abg zna. (UR FAVSSF) Jbzna.

ORYYB: (FGNAQF HC) Ab zber oybj ubg naq pbyq. Jung lbh ybatrq sbe unf
pbzr gb cnff. Uraprsbegu lbh ner haznaarq naq zvar va rnearfg, n guvat
haqre gur lbxr. Abj sbe lbhe chavfuzrag sebpx. Lbh jvyy furq lbhe znyr
tnezragf, lbh haqrefgnaq, Ehol Pbura? naq qba gur fubg fvyx yhkhevbhfyl
ehfgyvat bire urnq naq fubhyqref. Naq dhvpxyl gbb!

OYBBZ: (FUEVAXF) Fvyx, zvfgerff fnvq! B pevaxyl! fpencl! Zhfg V gvcgbhpu
vg jvgu zl anvyf?

ORYYB: (CBVAGF GB UVF JUBERF) Nf gurl ner abj fb jvyy lbh or, jvttrq,
fvatrq, creshzrfcenlrq, evprcbjqrerq, jvgu fzbbgufunira nezcvgf. Gncr
zrnfherzragf jvyy or gnxra arkg lbhe fxva. Lbh jvyy or ynprq jvgu pehry
sbepr vagb ivpryvxr pbefrgf bs fbsg qbir pbhgvyyr jvgu junyrobar ohfx gb
gur qvnzbaqgevzzrq cryivf, gur nofbyhgr bhgfvqr rqtr, juvyr lbhe svther,
cyhzcre guna jura ng ynetr, jvyy or erfgenvarq va arggvtug sebpxf, cerggl
gjb bhapr crggvpbngf naq sevatrf naq guvatf fgnzcrq, bs pbhefr, jvgu zl
ubhfrsynt, perngvbaf bs ybiryl yvatrevr sbe Nyvpr naq avpr fprag sbe
Nyvpr. Nyvpr jvyy srry gur chyychyy. Znegun naq Znel jvyy or n yvggyr
puvyyl ng svefg va fhpu qryvpngr guvtupnfvat ohg gur sevyyl syvzfvarff bs
ynpr ebhaq lbhe oner xarrf jvyy erzvaq lbh ...

OYBBZ: (N PUNEZVAT FBHOERGGR JVGU QNHOL PURRXF, ZHFGNEQ UNVE NAQ YNETR
ZNYR UNAQF NAQ ABFR, YRREVAT ZBHGU) V gevrq ure guvatf ba bayl gjvpr, n
fznyy cenax, va Ubyyrf fgerrg. Jura jr jrer uneq hc V jnfurq gurz gb fnir
gur ynhaqel ovyy. Zl bja fuvegf V ghearq. Vg jnf gur cherfg guevsg.

ORYYB: (WRREF) Yvggyr wbof gung znxr zbgure cyrnfrq, ru? Naq fubjrq bss
pbdhrggvfuyl va lbhe qbzvab ng gur zveebe oruvaq pybfrqenja oyvaqf lbhe
hafxvegrq guvtuf naq urtbng'f hqqref va inevbhf cbfrf bs fheeraqre, ru?
Ub! ub! V unir gb ynhtu! Gung frpbaqunaq oynpx bcrengbc fuvsg naq fubeg
gehaxyrt anhtugvrf nyy fcyvg hc gur fgvgpurf ng ure ynfg encr gung Zef
Zvevnz Qnaqenqr fbyq lbh sebz gur Furyobhear ubgry, ru?

OYBBZ: Zvevnz. Oynpx. Qrzvzbaqnvar.

ORYYB: (THSSNJF) Puevfg Nyzvtugl vg'f gbb gvpxyvat, guvf! Lbh jrer n
avprybbxvat Zvevnz jura lbh pyvccrq bss lbhe onpxtngr unvef naq ynl
fjbbavat va gur guvat npebff gur orq nf Zef Qnaqenqr nobhg gb or ivbyngrq
ol yvrhgranag Fzlgur-Fzlgur, Ze Cuvyvc Nhthfghf Oybpxjryy Z. C., fvtabe
Ynpv Qnerzb, gur ebohfg grabe, oyhrrlrq Oreg, gur yvsgobl, Uraev Syrhel
bs Tbeqba Oraargg snzr, Furevqna, gur dhnqebba Pebrfhf, gur inefvgl
jrgobo rvtug sebz byq Gevavgl, Cbagb, ure fcyraqvq Arjsbhaqynaq naq Obof,
qbjntre qhpurff bs Znabeunzvygba. (UR THSSNJF NTNVA) Puevfg, jbhyqa'g vg
znxr n Fvnzrfr png ynhtu?

OYBBZ: (URE UNAQF NAQ SRNGHERF JBEXVAT) Vg jnf Trenyq pbairegrq zr gb or
n gehr pbefrgybire jura V jnf srznyr vzcrefbangbe va gur Uvtu Fpubby cynl
IVPR IREFN. Vg jnf qrne Trenyq. Ur tbg gung xvax, snfpvangrq ol fvfgre'f
fgnlf. Abj qrnerfg Trenyq hfrf cvaxl ternfrcnvag naq tvyqf uvf rlryvqf.
Phyg bs gur ornhgvshy.

ORYYB: (JVGU JVPXRQ TYRR) Ornhgvshy! Tvir hf n oerngure! Jura lbh gbbx
lbhe frng jvgu jbznavfu pner, yvsgvat lbhe ovyybjl sybhaprf, ba gur
fzbbgujbea guebar.

OYBBZ: Fpvrapr. Gb pbzcner gur inevbhf wblf jr rnpu rawbl. (RNEARFGYL)
Naq ernyyl vg'f orggre gur cbfvgvba ... orpnhfr bsgra V hfrq gb jrg ...

ORYYB: (FGREAYL) Ab vafhobeqvangvba! Gur fnjqhfg vf gurer va gur pbeare
sbe lbh. V tnir lbh fgevpg vafgehpgvbaf, qvqa'g V? Qb vg fgnaqvat, fve!
V'yy grnpu lbh gb orunir yvxr n wvaxyrzna! Vs V pngpu n genpr ba lbhe
fjnqqyrf. Nun! Ol gur nff bs gur Qbenaf lbh'yy svaq V'z n znegvarg. Gur
fvaf bs lbhe cnfg ner evfvat ntnvafg lbh. Znal. Uhaqerqf.

GUR FVAF BS GUR CNFG: (VA N ZRQYRL BS IBVPRF) Ur jrag guebhtu n sbez bs
pynaqrfgvar zneevntr jvgu ng yrnfg bar jbzna va gur funqbj bs gur Oynpx
puhepu. Hafcrnxnoyr zrffntrf ur gryrcubarq zragnyyl gb Zvff Qhaa ng na
nqqerff va Q'Byvre fgerrg juvyr ur cerfragrq uvzfrys vaqrpragyl gb gur
vafgehzrag va gur pnyyobk. Ol jbeq naq qrrq ur senaxyl rapbhentrq n
abpgheany fgehzcrg gb qrcbfvg srpny naq bgure znggre va na hafnavgnel
bhgubhfr nggnpurq gb rzcgl cerzvfrf. Va svir choyvp pbairavraprf ur jebgr
crapvyyrq zrffntrf bssrevat uvf ahcgvny cnegare gb nyy fgebatzrzorerq
znyrf. Naq ol gur bssrafviryl fzryyvat ivgevby jbexf qvq ur abg cnff
avtug nsgre avtug ol ybivat pbhegvat pbhcyrf gb frr vs naq jung naq ubj
zhpu ur pbhyq frr? Qvq ur abg yvr va orq, gur tebff obne, tybngvat bire n
anhfrbhf sentzrag bs jryyhfrq gbvyrg cncre cerfragrq gb uvz ol n anfgl
uneybg, fgvzhyngrq ol tvatreoernq naq n cbfgny beqre?

ORYYB: (JUVFGYRF YBHQYL) Fnl! Jung jnf gur zbfg eribygvat cvrpr bs
bofpravgl va nyy lbhe pnerre bs pevzr? Tb gur jubyr ubt. Chxr vg bhg! Or
pnaqvq sbe bapr.

(ZHGR VAUHZNA SNPRF GUEBAT SBEJNEQ, YRREVAT, INAVFUVAT, TVOOREVAT,
OBBYBBUBBZ. CBYQL XBPX, OBBGYNPRF N CRAAL PNFFVQL'F UNT, OYVAQ FGEVCYVAT,
YNEEL EUVABPREBF, GUR TVEY, GUR JBZNA, GUR JUBER, GUR BGURE, GUR ...)

OYBBZ: Qba'g nfx zr! Bhe zhghny snvgu. Cyrnfnagf fgerrg. V bayl gubhtug
gur unys bs gur ... V fjrne ba zl fnperq bngu ...

ORYYB: (CRERZCGBEVYL) Nafjre. Erchtanag jergpu! V vafvfg ba xabjvat. Gryy
zr fbzrguvat gb nzhfr zr, fzhg be n oybbql tbbq tubfgfgbel be n yvar bs
cbrgel, dhvpx, dhvpx, dhvpx! Jurer? Ubj? Jung gvzr? Jvgu ubj znal? V tvir
lbh whfg guerr frpbaqf. Bar! Gjb! Gue ...

OYBBZ: (QBPVYR, THETYRF) V erererchtabfrq va ererererchtanag

ORYYB: (VZCREVBHFYL) B, trg bhg, lbh fxhax! Ubyq lbhe gbathr! Fcrnx jura
lbh'er fcbxra gb.

OYBBZ: (OBJF) Znfgre! Zvfgerff! Znagnzre!

(UR YVSGF UVF NEZF. UVF ONATYR OENPRYRGF SVYY.)

ORYYB: (FNGVEVPNYYL) Ol qnl lbh jvyy fbhfr naq ong bhe fzryyvat
haqrepybgurf nyfb jura jr ynqvrf ner hajryy, naq fjno bhg bhe yngevarf
jvgu qerff cvaarq hc naq n qvfupybhg gvrq gb lbhe gnvy. Jba'g gung or
avpr? (UR CYNPRF N EHOL EVAT BA URE SVATRE) Naq gurer abj! Jvgu guvf evat
V gurr bja. Fnl, gunax lbh, zvfgerff.

OYBBZ: Gunax lbh, zvfgerff.

ORYYB: Lbh jvyy znxr gur orqf, trg zl gho ernql, rzcgl gur cvffcbgf va
gur qvssrerag ebbzf, vapyhqvat byq Zef Xrbtu'f gur pbbx'f, n fnaql bar.
Nl, naq evafr gur frira bs gurz jryy, zvaq, be ync vg hc yvxr punzcntar.
Qevax zr cvcvat ubg. Ubc! Lbh jvyy qnapr nggraqnapr be V'yy yrpgher lbh
ba lbhe zvfqrrqf, Zvff Ehol, naq fcnax lbhe oner obg evtug jryy, zvff,
jvgu gur unveoehfu. Lbh'yy or gnhtug gur reebe bs lbhe jnlf. Ng avtug
lbhe jryypernzrq oenpryrggrq unaqf jvyy jrne sbeglguerrohggba tybirf
arjcbjqrerq jvgu gnyp naq univat qryvpngryl fpragrq svatregvcf. Sbe fhpu
snibhef xavtugf bs byq ynvq qbja gurve yvirf. (UR PUHPXYRF) Zl oblf jvyy
or ab raq punezrq gb frr lbh fb ynqlyvxr, gur pbybary, nobir nyy, jura
gurl pbzr urer gur avtug orsber gur jrqqvat gb sbaqyr zl arj nggenpgvba
va tvyqrq urryf. Svefg V'yy unir n tb ng lbh zlfrys. N zna V xabj ba gur
ghes anzrq Puneyrf Nyoregn Znefu (V jnf va orq jvgu uvz whfg abj naq
nabgure tragyrzna bhg bs gur Unancre naq Crggl Ont bssvpr) vf ba gur
ybbxbhg sbe n znvq bs nyy jbex ng n fubeg xabpx. Fjryy gur ohfg. Fzvyr.
Qebbc fubhyqref. Jung bssref? (UR CBVAGF) Sbe gung ybg. Genvarq ol bjare
gb srgpu naq pneel, onfxrg va zbhgu. (UR ONERF UVF NEZ NAQ CYHATRF VG
RYOBJQRRC VA OYBBZ'F IHYIN) Gurer'f svar qrcgu sbe lbh! Jung, oblf? Gung
tvir lbh n uneqba? (UR FUBIRF UVF NEZ VA N OVQQRE'F SNPR) Urer jrg gur
qrpx naq jvcr vg ebhaq!

N OVQQRE: N sybeva.

(QVYYBA'F YNPDHRL EVATF UVF UNAQORYY.)

GUR YNPDHRL: Onenat!

N IBVPR: Bar naq rvtugcrapr gbb zhpu.

PUNEYRF NYOREGN ZNEFU: Zhfg or ivetva. Tbbq oerngu. Pyrna.

ORYYB: (TVIRF N ENC JVGU UVF TNIRY) Gjb one. Ebpxobggbz svther naq purnc
ng gur cevpr. Sbhegrra unaqf uvtu. Gbhpu naq rknzvar uvf cbvagf. Unaqyr
uvz. Guvf qbjal fxva, gurfr fbsg zhfpyrf, guvf graqre syrfu. Vs V unq
bayl zl tbyq cvrepre urer! Naq dhvgr rnfl gb zvyx. Guerr arjynvq tnyybaf
n qnl. N cher fgbpxtrggre, qhr gb ynl jvguva gur ubhe. Uvf fver'f zvyx
erpbeq jnf n gubhfnaq tnyybaf bs jubyr zvyx va sbegl jrrxf. Jubn zl
wrjry! Ort hc! Jubn! (UR OENAQF UVF VAVGVNY P BA OYBBZ'F PEBHC) Fb!
Jneenagrq Pbura! Jung nqinapr ba gjb obo, tragyrzra?

N QNEXIVFNTRQ ZNA: (VA QVFTHVFRQ NPPRAG) Ubbaqreg chag fgreyvax.

IBVPRF: (FHOQHRQ) Sbe gur Pnyvcu. Unebha Ny Enfpuvq.

ORYYB: (TNVYL) Evtug. Yrg gurz nyy pbzr. Gur fpnagl, qnevatyl fubeg
fxveg, evqvat hc ng gur xarr gb fubj n crrc bs juvgr cnagnyrggr, vf n
cbgrag jrncba naq genafcnerag fgbpxvatf, rzrenyqtnegrerq, jvgu gur ybat
fgenvtug frnz genvyvat hc orlbaq gur xarr, nccrny gb gur orggre vafgvapgf
bs gur OYNFR zna nobhg gbja. Yrnea gur fzbbgu zvapvat jnyx ba sbhe vapu
Ybhvf Dhvamr urryf, gur Terpvna oraq jvgu cebibxvat pebhc, gur guvtuf
syhrfprag, xarrf zbqrfgyl xvffvat. Oevat nyy lbhe cbjref bs snfpvangvba
gb orne ba gurz. Cnaqre gb gurve Tbzbeenuna ivprf.

OYBBZ: (ORAQF UVF OYHFUVAT SNPR VAGB UVF NEZCVG NAQ FVZCREF JVGU
SBERSVATRE VA ZBHGU) B, V xabj jung lbh'er uvagvat ng abj!

ORYYB: Jung ryfr ner lbh tbbq sbe, na vzcbgrag guvat yvxr lbh? (UR FGBBCF
NAQ, CRREVAT, CBXRF JVGU UVF SNA EHQRYL HAQRE GUR SNG FHRG SBYQF BS
OYBBZ'F UNHAPURF) Hc! Hc! Znak png! Jung unir jr urer? Jurer'f lbhe pheyl
grncbg tbar gb be jub qbpxrq vg ba lbh, pbpxlbyyl? Fvat, oveql, fvat.
Vg'f nf yvzc nf n obl bs fvk'f qbvat uvf cbbyl oruvaq n pneg. Ohl n
ohpxrg be fryy lbhe chzc. (YBHQYL) Pna lbh qb n zna'f wbo?

OYBBZ: Rppyrf fgerrg ...

ORYYB: (FNEPNFGVPNYYL) V jbhyqa'g uheg lbhe srryvatf sbe gur jbeyq ohg
gurer'f n zna bs oenja va cbffrffvba gurer. Gur gnoyrf ner ghearq, zl tnl
lbhat sryybj! Ur vf fbzrguvat yvxr n shyytebja bhgqbbe zna. Jryy sbe lbh,
lbh zhss, vs lbh unq gung jrncba jvgu xabof naq yhzcf naq jnegf nyy bire
vg. Ur fubg uvf obyg, V pna gryy lbh! Sbbg gb sbbg, xarr gb xarr, oryyl
gb oryyl, ohof gb oernfg! Ur'f ab rhahpu. N fubpx bs erq unve ur unf
fgvpxvat bhg bs uvz oruvaq yvxr n shemrohfu! Jnvg sbe avar zbaguf, zl
ynq! Ubyl tvatre, vg'f xvpxvat naq pbhtuvat hc naq qbja va ure thgf
nyernql! Gung znxrf lbh jvyq, qba'g vg? Gbhpurf gur fcbg? (UR FCVGF VA
PBAGRZCG) Fcvggbba!

OYBBZ: V jnf vaqrpragyl gerngrq, V ... Vasbez gur cbyvpr. Uhaqerq cbhaqf.
Hazragvbanoyr. V ...

ORYYB: Jbhyq vs lbh pbhyq, ynzr qhpx. N qbjacbhe jr jnag abg lbhe
qevmmyr.

OYBBZ: Gb qevir zr znq! Zbyy! V sbetbg! Sbetvir! Zbyy ... Jr ... Fgvyy
...

ORYYB: (EHGUYRFFYL) Ab, Yrbcbyq Oybbz, nyy vf punatrq ol jbzna'f jvyy
fvapr lbh fyrcg ubevmbagny va Fyrrcl Ubyybj lbhe avtug bs gjragl lrnef.
Erghea naq frr.

(BYQ FYRRCL UBYYBJ PNYYF BIRE GUR JBYQ.)

FYRRCL UBYYBJ: Evc ina Jvax! Evc ina Jvaxyr!

OYBBZ: (VA GNGGRERQ ZBPNFFVAF JVGU N EHFGL SBJYVATCVRPR, GVCGBRVAT,
SVATREGVCCVAT, UVF UNTTNEQ OBAL ORNEQRQ SNPR CRREVAT GUEBHTU GUR QVNZBAQ
CNARF, PEVRF BHG) V frr ure! Vg'f fur! Gur svefg avtug ng Zng Qvyyba'f!
Ohg gung qerff, gur terra! Naq ure unve vf qlrq tbyq naq ur ...

ORYYB: (YNHTUF ZBPXVATYL) Gung'f lbhe qnhtugre, lbh bjy, jvgu n Zhyyvatne
fghqrag.

(ZVYYL OYBBZ, SNVEUNVERQ, TERRAIRFGRQ, FYVZFNAQNYYRQ, URE OYHR FPNES VA
GUR FRNJVAQ FVZCYL FJVEYVAT, OERNXF SEBZ GUR NEZF BS URE YBIRE NAQ PNYYF,
URE LBHAT RLRF JBAQREJVQR.)

ZVYYL: Zl! Vg'f Cncyv! Ohg, B Cncyv, ubj byq lbh'ir tebja!

ORYYB: Punatrq, ru? Bhe jungabg, bhe jevgvatgnoyr jurer jr arire jebgr,
nhag Urtnegl'f nezpunve, bhe pynffvp ercevagf bs byq znfgref. N zna naq
uvf zrasevraqf ner yvivat gurer va pybire. Gur PHPXBBF' ERFG! Jul abg?
Ubj znal jbzra unq lbh, ru, sbyybjvat gurz hc qnex fgerrgf, syngsbbg,
rkpvgvat gurz ol lbhe fzbgurerq tehagf, jung, lbh znyr cebfgvghgr?
Oynzryrff qnzrf jvgu cnepryf bs tebprevrf. Ghea nobhg. Fnhpr sbe gur
tbbfr, zl tnaqre B.

OYBBZ: Gurl ... V ...

ORYYB: (PHGGVATYL) Gurve urryznexf jvyy fgnzc gur Oehffryrggr pnecrg lbh
obhtug ng Jera'f nhpgvba. Va gurve ubefrcynl jvgu Zbyy gur ebzc gb svaq
gur ohpx syrn va ure oerrpurf gurl jvyy qrsnpr gur yvggyr fgnghr lbh
pneevrq ubzr va gur enva sbe neg sbe neg' fnxr. Gurl jvyy ivbyngr gur
frpergf bs lbhe obggbz qenjre. Cntrf jvyy or gbea sebz lbhe unaqobbx bs
nfgebabzl gb znxr gurz cvcrfcvyyf. Naq gurl jvyy fcvg va lbhe gra
fuvyyvat oenff sraqre sebz Unzcgba Yrrqbz'f.

OYBBZ: Gra naq fvk. Gur npg bs ybj fpbhaqeryf. Yrg zr tb. V jvyy erghea.
V jvyy cebir ...

N IBVPR: Fjrne!

(OYBBZ PYRAPURF UVF SVFGF NAQ PENJYF SBEJNEQ, N OBJVRXAVSR ORGJRRA UVF
GRRGU.)

ORYYB: Nf n cnlvat thrfg be n xrcg zna? Gbb yngr. Lbh unir znqr lbhe
frpbaqorfg orq naq bguref zhfg yvr va vg. Lbhe rcvgncu vf jevggra. Lbh
ner qbja naq bhg naq qba'g lbh sbetrg vg, byq orna.

OYBBZ: Whfgvpr! Nyy Verynaq irefhf bar! Unf abobql ...? (UR OVGRF UVF
GUHZO)

ORYYB: Qvr naq or qnzarq gb lbh vs lbh unir nal frafr bs qrprapl be tenpr
nobhg lbh. V pna tvir lbh n ener byq jvar gung'yy fraq lbh fxvccvat gb
uryy naq onpx. Fvta n jvyy naq yrnir hf nal pbva lbh unir! Vs lbh unir
abar frr lbh qnza jryy trg vg, fgrny vg, ebo vg! Jr'yy ohel lbh va bhe
fuehoorel wnxrf jurer lbh'yy or qrnq naq qvegl jvgu byq Phpx Pbura, zl
fgrcarcurj V zneevrq, gur oybbql byq tbhgl cebphengbe naq fbqbzvgr jvgu n
pevpx va uvf arpx, naq zl bgure gra be ryrira uhfonaqf, jungrire gur
ohttref' anzrf jrer, fhssbpngrq va gur bar prffcbby. (UR RKCYBQRF VA N
YBHQ CUYRTZL YNHTU) Jr'yy znaher lbh, Ze Sybjre! (UR CVCRF FPBSSVATYL)
Olol, Cbyql! Olol, Cncyv!

OYBBZ: (PYNFCF UVF URNQ) Zl jvyycbjre! Zrzbel! V unir fvaarq! V unir fhss
...

(UR JRRCF GRNEYRFFYL)

ORYYB: (FARREF) Pelonool! Pebpbqvyr grnef!

(OYBBZ, OEBXRA, PYBFRYL IRVYRQ SBE GUR FNPEVSVPR, FBOF, UVF SNPR GB GUR
RNEGU. GUR CNFFVAT ORYY VF URNEQ. QNEXFUNJYRQ SVTHERF BS GUR PVEPHZPVFRQ,
VA FNPXPYBGU NAQ NFURF, FGNAQ OL GUR JNVYVAT JNYY. Z. FUHYBZBJVGM, WBFRCU
TBYQJNGRE, ZBFRF UREMBT, UNEEVF EBFRAORET, Z. ZBVFRY, W. PVGEBA, ZVAAVR
JNGPUZNA, C. ZNFGVNAFXL, GUR ERIRERAQ YRBCBYQ NOENZBIVGM, PUNMRA. JVGU
FJNLVAT NEZF GURL JNVY VA CARHZN BIRE GUR ERPERNAG OYBBZ.)

GUR PVEPHZPVFRQ: (VA QNEX THGGHENY PUNAG NF GURL PNFG QRNQ FRN SEHVG HCBA
UVZ, AB SYBJREF) FURZN VFENRY NQBANV RYBURAH NQBANV RPUNQ.

IBVPRF: (FVTUVAT) Fb ur'f tbar. Nu lrf. Lrf, vaqrrq. Oybbz? Arire urneq
bs uvz. Ab? Dhrre xvaq bs punc. Gurer'f gur jvqbj. Gung fb? Nu, lrf.

(SEBZ GUR FHGGRR CLER GUR SYNZR BS THZ PNZCUVER NFPRAQF. GUR CNYY BS
VAPRAFR FZBXR FPERRAF NAQ QVFCREFRF. BHG BS URE BNXSENZR N ALZCU JVGU
UNVE HAOBHAQ, YVTUGYL PYNQ VA GRNOEBJA NEGPBYBHEF, QRFPRAQF SEBZ URE
TEBGGB NAQ CNFFVAT HAQRE VAGREYNPVAT LRJF FGNAQF BIRE OYBBZ.)

GUR LRJF: (GURVE YRNIRF JUVFCREVAT) Fvfgre. Bhe fvfgre. Ffu!

GUR ALZCU: (FBSGYL) Zbegny! (XVAQYL) Anl, qbfg abg jrrcrfg!

OYBBZ: (PENJYF WRYYVYL SBEJNEQ HAQRE GUR OBHTUF, FGERNXRQ OL FHAYVTUG,
JVGU QVTAVGL) Guvf cbfvgvba. V sryg vg jnf rkcrpgrq bs zr. Sbepr bs
unovg.

GUR ALZCU: Zbegny! Lbh sbhaq zr va rivy pbzcnal, uvtuxvpxref, pbfgre
cvpavpznxref, chtvyvfgf, cbchyne trarenyf, vzzbeny cnagb oblf va
syrfugvtugf naq gur avsgl fuvzzl qnapref, Yn Nheben naq Xnevav, zhfvpny
npg, gur uvg bs gur praghel. V jnf uvqqra va purnc cvax cncre gung fzryg
bs ebpx bvy. V jnf fheebhaqrq ol gur fgnyr fzhg bs pyhozra, fgbevrf gb
qvfgheo pnyybj lbhgu, nqf sbe genafcnerapvrf, gehrqhc qvpr naq ohfgcnqf,
cebcevrgnel negvpyrf naq jul jrne n gehff jvgu grfgvzbavny sebz ehcgherq
tragyrzna. Hfrshy uvagf gb gur zneevrq.

OYBBZ: (YVSGF N GHEGYR URNQ GBJNEQF URE YNC) Jr unir zrg orsber. Ba
nabgure fgne.

GUR ALZCU: (FNQYL) Ehoore tbbqf. Arireevc oenaq nf fhccyvrq gb gur
nevfgbpenpl. Pbefrgf sbe zra. V pher svgf be zbarl ershaqrq. Hafbyvpvgrq
grfgvzbavnyf sbe Cebsrffbe Jnyqznaa'f jbaqreshy purfg rkhore. Zl ohfg
qrirybcrq sbhe vapurf va guerr jrrxf, ercbegf Zef Thf Ehoyva jvgu cubgb.

OYBBZ: Lbh zrna CUBGB OVGF?

GUR ALZCU: V qb. Lbh ober zr njnl, senzrq zr va bnx naq gvafry, frg zr
nobir lbhe zneevntr pbhpu. Hafrra, bar fhzzre rir, lbh xvffrq zr va sbhe
cynprf. Naq jvgu ybivat crapvy lbh funqrq zl rlrf, zl obfbz naq zl funzr.

OYBBZ: (UHZOYL XVFFRF URE YBAT UNVE) Lbhe pynffvp pheirf, ornhgvshy
vzzbegny, V jnf tynq gb ybbx ba lbh, gb cenvfr lbh, n guvat bs ornhgl,
nyzbfg gb cenl.

GUR ALZCU: Qhevat qnex avtugf V urneq lbhe cenvfr.

OYBBZ: (DHVPXYL) Lrf, lrf. Lbh zrna gung V ... Fyrrc erirnyf gur jbefg
fvqr bs rirelbar, puvyqera creuncf rkprcgrq. V xabj V sryy bhg bs orq be
engure jnf chfurq. Fgrry jvar vf fnvq gb pher fabevat. Sbe gur erfg gurer
vf gung Ratyvfu vairagvba, cnzcuyrg bs juvpu V erprvirq fbzr qnlf ntb,
vapbeerpgyl nqqerffrq. Vg pynvzf gb nssbeq n abvfryrff, vabssrafvir irag.
(UR FVTUF) 'Gjnf rire guhf. Senvygl, gul anzr vf zneevntr.

GUR ALZCU: (URE SVATREF VA URE RNEF) Naq jbeqf. Gurl ner abg va zl
qvpgvbanel.

OYBBZ: Lbh haqrefgbbq gurz?

GUR LRJF: Ffu!

GUR ALZCU: (PBIREF URE SNPR JVGU URE UNAQF) Jung unir V abg frra va gung
punzore? Jung zhfg zl rlrf ybbx qbja ba?

OYBBZ: (NCBYBTRGVPNYYL) V xabj. Fbvyrq crefbany yvara, jebat fvqr hc jvgu
pner. Gur dhbvgf ner ybbfr. Sebz Tvoenygne ol ybat frn ybat ntb.

GUR ALZCU: (ORAQF URE URNQ) Jbefr, jbefr!

OYBBZ: (ERSYRPGF CERPNHGVBHFYL) Gung nagvdhngrq pbzzbqr. Vg jnfa'g ure
jrvtug. Fur fpnyrq whfg ryrira fgbar avar. Fur chg ba avar cbhaqf nsgre
jrnavat. Vg jnf n penpx naq jnag bs tyhr. Ru? Naq gung nofheq benatrxrlrq
hgrafvy juvpu unf bayl bar unaqyr.

(GUR FBHAQ BS N JNGRESNYY VF URNEQ VA OEVTUG PNFPNQR.)

GUR JNGRESNYY:


    Cbhyncubhpn Cbhyncubhpn
    Cbhyncubhpn Cbhyncubhpn.


GUR LRJF: (ZVATYVAT GURVE OBHTUF) Yvfgra. Juvfcre. Fur vf evtug, bhe
fvfgre. Jr terj ol Cbhyncubhpn jngresnyy. Jr tnir funqr ba ynathbebhf
fhzzre qnlf.

WBUA JLFR ABYNA: (VA GUR ONPXTEBHAQ, VA VEVFU ANGVBANY SBERFGRE'F
HAVSBEZ, QBSSF UVF CYHZRQ UNG) Cebfcre! Tvir funqr ba ynathbebhf qnlf,
gerrf bs Verynaq!

GUR LRJF: (ZHEZHEVAT) Jub pnzr gb Cbhyncubhpn jvgu gur Uvtu Fpubby
rkphefvba? Jub yrsg uvf ahgdhrfgvat pynffzngrf gb frrx bhe funqr?

OYBBZ: (FPNERQ) Uvtu Fpubby bs Cbhyn? Zarzb? Abg va shyy cbffrffvba bs
snphygvrf. Pbaphffvba. Eha bire ol genz.

GUR RPUB: Funz!

OYBBZ: (CVTRBAOERNFGRQ, OBGGYRFUBHYQRERQ, CNQQRQ, VA ABAQRFPEVCG WHIRAVYR
TERL NAQ OYNPX FGEVCRQ FHVG, GBB FZNYY SBE UVZ, JUVGR GRAAVF FUBRF,
OBEQRERQ FGBPXVATF JVGU GHEABIRE GBCF NAQ N ERQ FPUBBYPNC JVGU ONQTR) V
jnf va zl grraf, n tebjvat obl. N yvggyr gura fhssvprq, n wbygvat pne,
gur zvatyvat bqbhef bs gur ynqvrf' pybnxebbz naq yningbel, gur guebat
craarq gvtug ba gur byq Eblny fgnvef (sbe gurl ybir pehfurf, vafgvapg bs
gur ureq, naq gur qnex frkfzryyvat gurnger haoevqyrf ivpr), rira n
cevpryvfg bs gurve ubfvrel. Naq gura gur urng. Gurer jrer fhafcbgf gung
fhzzre. Raq bs fpubby. Naq gvcflpnxr. Unyplba qnlf.

(UNYPLBA QNLF, UVTU FPUBBY OBLF VA OYHR NAQ JUVGR SBBGONYY WREFRLF NAQ
FUBEGF, ZNFGRE QBANYQ GHEAOHYY, ZNFGRE NOENUNZ PUNGGREGBA, ZNFGRE BJRA
TBYQORET, ZNFGRE WNPX ZRERQVGU, ZNFGRE CREPL NCWBUA, FGNAQ VA N PYRNEVAT
BS GUR GERRF NAQ FUBHG GB ZNFGRE YRBCBYQ OYBBZ.)

GUR UNYPLBA QNLF: Znpxrery! Yvir hf ntnva. Uheenl! (GURL PURRE)

OYBBZ: (UBOOYRQRUBL, JNEZTYBIRQ, ZNZZNZHSSYRERQ, FGNEERQ JVGU FCRAG
FABJONYYF, FGEHTTYRF GB EVFR) Ntnva! V srry fvkgrra! Jung n ynex! Yrg'f
evat nyy gur oryyf va Zbagnthr fgerrg. (UR PURREF SRROYL) Uheenl sbe gur
Uvtu Fpubby!

GUR RPUB: Sbby!

GUR LRJF: (EHFGYVAT) Fur vf evtug, bhe fvfgre. Juvfcre. (JUVFCRERQ XVFFRF
NER URNEQ VA NYY GUR JBBQ. SNPRF BS UNZNQELNQF CRRC BHG SEBZ GUR OBYRF
NAQ NZBAT GUR YRNIRF NAQ OERNX, OYBFFBZVAT VAGB OYBBZ.) Jub cebsnarq bhe
fvyrag funqr?

GUR ALZCU: (PBLYL, GUEBHTU CNEGVAT SVATREF) Gurer? Va gur bcra nve?

GUR LRJF: (FJRRCVAT QBJAJNEQ) Fvfgre, lrf. Naq ba bhe ivetva fjneq.

GUR JNGRESNYY:


    Cbhyncubhpn Cbhyncubhpn
    Cubhpncubhpn Cubhpncubhpn.



GUR ALZCU: (JVGU JVQR SVATREF) B, vasnzl!

OYBBZ: V jnf cerpbpvbhf. Lbhgu. Gur snhan. V fnpevsvprq gb gur tbq bs gur
sberfg. Gur sybjref gung oybbz va gur fcevat. Vg jnf cnvevat gvzr.
Pncvyynel nggenpgvba vf n angheny curabzraba. Ybggl Pynexr, synkraunverq,
V fnj ng ure avtug gbvyrggr guebhtu vyypybfrq phegnvaf jvgu cbbe cncn'f
bcrentynffrf: Gur jnagba ngr tenff jvyqyl. Fur ebyyrq qbjauvyy ng Evnygb
oevqtr gb grzcg zr jvgu ure sybj bs navzny fcvevgf. Fur pyvzorq gurve
pebbxrq gerr naq V ... N fnvag pbhyqa'g erfvfg vg. Gur qrzba cbffrffrq
zr. Orfvqrf, jub fnj?

(FGNTTREVAT OBO, N JUVGRCBYYRQ PNYS, GUEHFGF N EHZVANGVAT URNQ JVGU UHZVQ
ABFGEVYF GUEBHTU GUR SBYVNTR.)

FGNTTREVAT OBO: (YNETR GRNEQEBCF EBYYVAT SEBZ UVF CEBZVARAG RLRF,
FAVIRYF) Zr. Zr frr.

OYBBZ: Fvzcyl fngvfslvat n arrq V ... (JVGU CNGUBF) Ab tvey jbhyq jura V
jrag tveyvat. Gbb htyl. Gurl jbhyqa'g cynl ...

(UVTU BA ORA UBJGU GUEBHTU EUBQBQRAQEBAF N ANAALTBNG CNFFRF,
CYHZCHQQRERQ, OHGGLGNVYRQ, QEBCCVAT PHEENAGF.)

GUR ANAALTBNG: (OYRNGF) Zrtrttnttrtt! Anaanaanaal!

OYBBZ: (UNGYRFF, SYHFURQ, PBIRERQ JVGU OHEEF BS GUVFGYRQBJA NAQ
TBEFRFCVAR) Erthyneyl ratntrq. Pvephzfgnaprf nygre pnfrf. (UR TNMRF
VAGRAGYL QBJAJNEQF BA GUR JNGRE) Guveglgjb urnq bire urryf cre frpbaq.
Cerff avtugzner. Tvqql Ryvwnu. Snyy sebz pyvss. Fnq raq bs tbireazrag
cevagre'f pyrex. (GUEBHTU FVYIREFVYRAG FHZZRE NVE GUR QHZZL BS OYBBZ,
EBYYRQ VA N ZHZZL, EBYYF EBGRNGVATYL SEBZ GUR YVBA'F URNQ PYVSS VAGB GUR
CHECYR JNVGVAT JNGREF.)

GUR QHZZLZHZZL: Oooooyyyyyoyoyoyoybofpuot!

(SNE BHG VA GUR ONL ORGJRRA ONVYRL NAQ XVFU YVTUGF GUR Reva'f Xvat FNVYF,
FRAQVAT N OEBNQRAVAT CYHZR BS PBNYFZBXR SEBZ URE SHAARY GBJNEQF GUR
YNAQ.)

PBHAPVYYBE ANAARGVV: (NYBAR BA QRPX, VA QNEX NYCNPN, LRYYBJXVGRSNPRQ, UVF
UNAQ VA UVF JNVFGPBNG BCRAVAT, QRPYNVZF) Jura zl pbhagel gnxrf ure cynpr
nzbat gur angvbaf bs gur rnegu, gura, naq abg gvyy gura, yrg zl rcvgncu
or jevggra. V unir ...

OYBBZ: Qbar. Cess!

GUR ALZCU: (YBSGVYL) Jr vzzbegnyf, nf lbh fnj gbqnl, unir abg fhpu n
cynpr naq ab unve gurer rvgure. Jr ner fgbarpbyq naq cher. Jr rng
ryrpgevp yvtug. (FUR NEPURF URE OBQL VA YNFPVIVBHF PEVFCNGVBA, CYNPVAT
URE SBERSVATRE VA URE ZBHGU) Fcbxr gb zr. Urneq sebz oruvaq. Ubj gura
pbhyq lbh ...?

OYBBZ: (CNJVAT GUR URNGURE NOWRPGYL) B, V unir orra n cresrpg cvt. Rarznf
gbb V unir nqzvavfgrerq. Bar guveq bs n cvag bs dhnffvn gb juvpu nqq n
gnoyrfcbbashy bs ebpxfnyg. Hc gur shaqnzrag. Jvgu Unzvygba Ybat'f
flevatr, gur ynqvrf' sevraq.

GUR ALZCU: Va zl cerfrapr. Gur cbjqrechss. (FUR OYHFURF NAQ ZNXRF N XARR)
Naq gur erfg!

OYBBZ: (QRWRPGRQ) Lrf. CRPPNIV! V unir cnvq ubzntr ba gung yvivat nygne
jurer gur onpx punatrf anzr. (JVGU FHQQRA SREIBHE) Sbe jul fubhyq gur
qnvagl fpragrq wrjryyrq unaq, gur unaq gung ehyrf ...?

(SVTHERF JVAQ FRECRAGVAT VA FYBJ JBBQYNAQ CNGGREA NEBHAQ GUR GERRFGRZF,
PBBRRVAT)

GUR IBVPR BS XVGGL: (VA GUR GUVPXRG) Fubj hf bar bs gurz phfuvbaf.

GUR IBVPR BS SYBEEL: Urer.

(N TEBHFR JVATF PYHZFVYL GUEBHTU GUR HAQREJBBQ.)

GUR IBVPR BS YLAPU: (VA GUR GUVPXRG) Jurj! Cvcvat ubg!

GUR IBVPR BS MBR: (SEBZ GUR GUVPXRG) Pnzr sebz n ubg cynpr.

GUR IBVPR BS IVENT: (N OVEQPUVRS, OYHRFGERNXRQ NAQ SRNGURERQ VA JNE
CNABCYL JVGU UVF NFFRTNV, FGEVQVAT GUEBHTU N PENPXYVAT PNAROENXR BIRE
ORRPUZNFG NAQ NPBEAF) Ubg! Ubg! Jner Fvggvat Ohyy!

OYBBZ: Vg birecbjref zr. Gur jnez vzcerff bs ure jnez sbez. Rira gb fvg
jurer n jbzna unf fng, rfcrpvnyyl jvgu qvinevpngrq guvtuf, nf gubhtu gb
tenag gur ynfg snibhef, zbfg rfcrpvnyyl jvgu cerivbhfyl jryy hcyvsgrq
juvgr fngrra pbngcnaf. Fb jbznayl, shyy. Vg svyyf zr shyy.

GUR JNGRESNYY:


    Cuvyyncuhyyn Cbhyncubhpn
    Cbhyncubhpn Cbhyncubhpn.


GUR LRJF: Ffu! Fvfgre, fcrnx!

GUR ALZCU: (RLRYRFF, VA AHA'F JUVGR UNOVG, PBVS NAQ UHTRJVATRQ JVZCYR,
FBSGYL, JVGU ERZBGR RLRF) Genadhvyyn pbairag. Fvfgre Ntngun. Zbhag
Pnezry. Gur nccnevgvbaf bs Xabpx naq Ybheqrf. Ab zber qrfver. (FUR
ERPYVARF URE URNQ, FVTUVAT) Bayl gur rgurerny. Jurer qernzl pernzl thyy
jnirf b're gur jngref qhyy.

(OYBBZ UNYS EVFRF. UVF ONPX GEBHFREOHGGBA FANCF.)

GUR OHGGBA: Ovc!

(GJB FYHGF BS GUR PBBZOR QNAPR ENVAVYL OL, FUNJYRQ, LRYYVAT SYNGYL.)

GUR FYHGF:


    B, Yrbcbyq ybfg gur cva bs uvf qenjref
    Ur qvqa'g xabj jung gb qb,
    Gb xrrc vg hc,
    Gb xrrc vg hc.


OYBBZ: (PBYQYL) Lbh unir oebxra gur fcryy. Gur ynfg fgenj. Vs gurer jrer
bayl rgurerny jurer jbhyq lbh nyy or, cbfghynagf naq abivprf? Ful ohg
jvyyvat yvxr na nff cvffvat.

GUR LRJF: (GURVE FVYIRESBVY BS YRNIRF CERPVCVGNGVAT, GURVE FXVAAL NEZF
NTVAT NAQ FJNLVAT) Qrpvqhbhfyl!

GUR ALZCU: (ure srngherf uneqravat, tebcrf va gur sbyqf bs ure unovg)
Fnpevyrtr! Gb nggrzcg zl iveghr! (N YNETR ZBVFG FGNVA NCCRNEF BA URE
EBOR) Fhyyl zl vaabprapr! Lbh ner abg svg gb gbhpu gur tnezrag bs n cher
jbzna. (FUR PYHGPURF NTNVA VA URE EBOR) Jnvg. Fngna, lbh'yy fvat ab zber
ybirfbatf. Nzra. Nzra. Nzra. Nzra. (FUR QENJF N CBAVNEQ NAQ, PYNQ VA GUR
FURNGUZNVY BS NA RYRPGRQ XAVTUG BS AVAR, FGEVXRF NG UVF YBVAF) Arxhz!

OYBBZ: (FGNEGF HC, FRVMRF URE UNAQ) Ubl! Aroenxnqn! Png b' avar yvirf!
Snve cynl, znqnz. Ab cehavatxavsr. Gur sbk naq gur tencrf, vf vg? Jung qb
lbh ynpx jvgu lbhe oneorq jver? Pehpvsvk abg guvpx rabhtu? (UR PYHGPURF
URE IRVY) N ubyl noobg lbh jnag be Oebcul, gur ynzr tneqrare, be gur
fcbhgyrff fgnghr bs gur jngrepneevre, be tbbq zbgure Nycubafhf, ru
Erlaneq?

GUR ALZCU: (JVGU N PEL SYRRF SEBZ UVZ HAIRVYRQ, URE CYNFGRE PNFG
PENPXVAT, N PYBHQ BS FGRAPU RFPNCVAT SEBZ GUR PENPXF) Cbyv ...!

OYBBZ: (PNYYF NSGRE URE) Nf vs lbh qvqa'g trg vg ba gur qbhoyr
lbhefryirf. Ab wrexf naq zhygvcyr zhpbfvgvrf nyy bire lbh. V gevrq vg.
Lbhe fgeratgu bhe jrnxarff. Jung'f bhe fghqsrr? Jung jvyy lbh cnl ba gur
anvy? Lbh srr zraqnapref ba gur Evivren, V ernq. (GUR SYRRVAT ALZCU
ENVFRF N XRRA) Ru? V unir fvkgrra lrnef bs oynpx fynir ynobhe oruvaq zr.
Naq jbhyq n whel tvir zr svir fuvyyvatf nyvzbal gbzbeebj, ru? Sbby
fbzrbar ryfr, abg zr. (UR FAVSSF) Ehg. Bavbaf. Fgnyr. Fhycuhe. Ternfr.

(GUR SVTHER BS ORYYN PBURA FGNAQF ORSBER UVZ.)

ORYYN: Lbh'yy xabj zr gur arkg gvzr.

OYBBZ: (PBZCBFRQ, ERTNEQF URE) Cnffrr. Zhggba qerffrq nf ynzo. Ybat va
gur gbbgu naq fhcresyhbhf unve. N enj bavba gur ynfg guvat ng avtug jbhyq
orarsvg lbhe pbzcyrkvba. Naq gnxr fbzr qbhoyr puva qevyy. Lbhe rlrf ner
nf incvq nf gur tynffrlrf bs lbhe fghssrq sbk. Gurl unir gur qvzrafvbaf
bs lbhe bgure srngherf, gung'f nyy. V'z abg n gevcyr fperj cebcryyre.

ORYYN: (PBAGRZCGHBHFYL) Lbh'er abg tnzr, va snpg. (URE FBJPHAG ONEXF)
Souenpug!

OYBBZ: (PBAGRZCGHBHFYL) Pyrna lbhe anvyyrff zvqqyr svatre svefg, lbhe
ohyyl'f pbyq fchax vf qevccvat sebz lbhe pbpxfpbzo. Gnxr n unaqshy bs unl
naq jvcr lbhefrys.

ORYYN: V xabj lbh, pnainffre! Qrnq pbq!

OYBBZ: V fnj uvz, xvcxrrcre! Cbk naq tyrrg iraqbe!

ORYYN: (GHEAF GB GUR CVNAB) Juvpu bs lbh jnf cynlvat gur qrnq znepu sebz
FNHY?

MBR: Zr. Zvaq lbhe pbeasybjref. (FUR QNEGF GB GUR CVNAB NAQ ONATF PUBEQF
BA VG JVGU PEBFFRQ NEZF) Gur png'f enzoyr guebhtu gur fynt. (FUR TYNAPRF
ONPX) Ru? Jub'f znxvat ybir gb zl fjrrgvrf? (FUR QNEGF ONPX GB GUR GNOYR)
Jung'f lbhef vf zvar naq jung'f zvar vf zl bja.

(XVGGL, QVFPBAPREGRQ, PBNGF URE GRRGU JVGU GUR FVYIRE CNCRE. OYBBZ
NCCEBNPURF MBR.)

OYBBZ: (TRAGYL) Tvir zr onpx gung cbgngb, jvyy lbh?

MBR: Sbesrvgf, n svar guvat naq n fhcresvar guvat.

OYBBZ: (JVGU SRRYVAT) Vg vf abguvat, ohg fgvyy, n eryvp bs cbbe znzzn.

MBR:


    Tvir n guvat naq gnxr vg onpx
    Tbq'yy nfx lbh jurer vf gung
    Lbh'yy fnl lbh qba'g xabj
    Tbq'yy fraq lbh qbja orybj.


OYBBZ: Gurer vf n zrzbel nggnpurq gb vg. V fubhyq yvxr gb unir vg.

FGRCURA: Gb unir be abg gb unir gung vf gur dhrfgvba.

MBR: Urer. (FUR UNHYF HC N ERRS BS URE FYVC, ERIRNYVAT URE ONER GUVTU,
NAQ HAEBYYF GUR CBGNGB SEBZ GUR GBC BS URE FGBPXVAT) Gubfr gung uvqrf
xabjf jurer gb svaq.

ORYYN: (SEBJAF) Urer. Guvf vfa'g n zhfvpny crrcfubj. Naq qba'g lbh fznfu
gung cvnab. Jub'f cnlvat urer?

(FUR TBRF GB GUR CVNABYN. FGRCURA SHZOYRF VA UVF CBPXRG NAQ, GNXVAT BHG N
ONAXABGR OL VGF PBEARE, UNAQF VG GB URE.)

FGRCURA: (JVGU RKNTTRENGRQ CBYVGRARFF) Guvf fvyxra chefr V znqr bhg bs
gur fbj'f rne bs gur choyvp. Znqnz, rkphfr zr. Vs lbh nyybj zr. (UR
VAQVPNGRF INTHRYL YLAPU NAQ OYBBZ) Jr ner nyy va gur fnzr fjrrcfgnxr,
Xvapu naq Ylapu. QNAF PR OBEQRY BH GRABAF ABFGER RGNG.

YLAPU: (PNYYF SEBZ GUR URNEGU) Qrqnyhf! Tvir ure lbhe oyrffvat sbe zr.

FGRCURA: (UNAQF ORYYN N PBVA) Tbyq. Fur unf vg.

ORYYN: (YBBXF NG GUR ZBARL, GURA NG FGRCURA, GURA NG MBR, SYBEEL NAQ
XVGGL) Qb lbh jnag guerr tveyf? Vg'f gra fuvyyvatf urer.

FGRCURA: (QRYVTUGRQYL) N uhaqerq gubhfnaq ncbybtvrf. (UR SHZOYRF NTNVA
NAQ GNXRF BHG NAQ UNAQF URE GJB PEBJAF) Crezvg, OERIV ZNAH, zl fvtug vf
fbzrjung gebhoyrq.

(ORYYN TBRF GB GUR GNOYR GB PBHAG GUR ZBARL JUVYR FGRCURA GNYXF GB
UVZFRYS VA ZBABFLYYNOYRF. MBR ORAQF BIRE GUR GNOYR. XVGGL YRNAF BIRE
MBR'F ARPX. YLAPU TRGF HC, EVTUGF UVF PNC NAQ, PYNFCVAT XVGGL'F JNVFG,
NQQF UVF URNQ GB GUR TEBHC.)

SYBEEL: (FGEVIRF URNIVYL GB EVFR) Bj! Zl sbbg'f nfyrrc. (FUR YVZCF BIRE
GB GUR GNOYR. OYBBZ NCCEBNPURF.)

ORYYN, MBR, XVGGL, YLAPU, OYBBZ: (PUNGGREVAT NAQ FDHNOOYVAT) Gur
tragyrzna ... gra fuvyyvatf ... cnlvat sbe gur guerr ... nyybj zr n
zbzrag ... guvf tragyrzna cnlf frcnengr ... jub'f gbhpuvat vg? ... bj!
... zvaq jub lbh'er cvapuvat ... ner lbh fgnlvat gur avtug be n fubeg
gvzr?... jub qvq?... lbh'er n yvne, rkphfr zr ... gur tragyrzna cnvq qbja
yvxr n tragyrzna ... qevax ... vg'f ybat nsgre ryrira.

FGRCURA: (NG GUR CVNABYN, ZNXVAT N TRFGHER BS NOUBEERAPR) Ab obggyrf!
Jung, ryrira? N evqqyr!

MBR: (YVSGVAT HC URE CRGGVTBJA NAQ SBYQVAT N UNYS FBIRERVTA VAGB GUR GBC
BS URE FGBPXVAT) Uneq rnearq ba gur syng bs zl onpx.

YLAPU: (YVSGVAT XVGGL SEBZ GUR GNOYR) Pbzr!

XVGGL: Jnvg. (FUR PYHGPURF GUR GJB PEBJAF)

SYBEEL: Naq zr?

YLAPU: Ubbcyn! (UR YVSGF URE, PNEEVRF URE NAQ OHZCF URE QBJA BA GUR
FBSN.)

FGRCURA:


    Gur sbk perj, gur pbpxf syrj,
    Gur oryyf va urnira
    Jrer fgevxvat ryrira.
    'Gvf gvzr sbe ure cbbe fbhy
    Gb trg bhg bs urnira.


OYBBZ: (DHVRGYL YNLF N UNYS FBIRERVTA BA GUR GNOYR ORGJRRA ORYYN NAQ
SYBEEL) Fb. Nyybj zr. (UR GNXRF HC GUR CBHAQABGR) Guerr gvzrf gra. Jr'er
fdhner.

ORYYN: (NQZVEVATYL) Lbh'er fhpu n fylobbgf, byq pbpxl. V pbhyq xvff lbh.

MBR: (CBVAGF) Uvz? Qrrc nf n qenjjryy. (YLAPU ORAQF XVGGL ONPX BIRE GUR
FBSN NAQ XVFFRF URE. OYBBZ TBRF JVGU GUR CBHAQABGR GB FGRCURA.)

OYBBZ: Guvf vf lbhef.

FGRCURA: Ubj vf gung? YRF QVFGENVG be nofragzvaqrq orttne. (UR SHZOYRF
NTNVA VA UVF CBPXRG NAQ QENJF BHG N UNAQSHY BS PBVAF. NA BOWRPG SVYYF.)
Gung sryy.

OYBBZ: (FGBBCVAT, CVPXF HC NAQ UNAQF N OBK BS ZNGPURF) Guvf.

FGRCURA: Yhpvsre. Gunaxf.

OYBBZ: (DHVRGYL) Lbh unq orggre unaq bire gung pnfu gb zr gb gnxr pner
bs. Jul cnl zber?

FGRCURA: (UNAQF UVZ NYY UVF PBVAF) Or whfg orsber lbh ner trarebhf.

OYBBZ: V jvyy ohg vf vg jvfr? (UR PBHAGF) Bar, frira, ryrira, naq svir.
Fvk. Ryrira. V qba'g nafjre sbe jung lbh znl unir ybfg.

FGRCURA: Jul fgevxvat ryrira? Cebcnebklgba. Zbzrag orsber gur arkg
Yrffvat fnlf. Guvefgl sbk. (UR YNHTUF YBHQYL) Ohelvat uvf tenaqzbgure.
Cebonoyl ur xvyyrq ure.

OYBBZ: Gung vf bar cbhaq fvk naq ryrira. Bar cbhaq frira, fnl.

FGRCURA: Qbrfa'g znggre n enzoyvat qnza.

OYBBZ: Ab, ohg ...

FGRCURA: (PBZRF GB GUR GNOYR) Pvtnerggr, cyrnfr. (YLAPU GBFFRF N
PVTNERGGR SEBZ GUR FBSN GB GUR GNOYR) Naq fb Trbetvan Wbuafba vf qrnq naq
zneevrq. (N PVTNERGGR NCCRNEF BA GUR GNOYR. FGRCURA YBBXF NG VG) Jbaqre.
Cneybhe zntvp. Zneevrq. Uz. (UR FGEVXRF N ZNGPU NAQ CEBPRRQF GB YVTUG GUR
PVTNERGGR JVGU RAVTZNGVP ZRYNAPUBYL)

YLAPU: (JNGPUVAT UVZ) Lbh jbhyq unir n orggre punapr bs yvtugvat vg vs
lbh uryq gur zngpu arnere.

FGRCURA: (OEVATF GUR ZNGPU ARNE UVF RLR) Ylak rlr. Zhfg trg tynffrf.
Oebxr gurz lrfgreqnl. Fvkgrra lrnef ntb. Qvfgnapr. Gur rlr frrf nyy syng.
(UR QENJF GUR ZNGPU NJNL. VG TBRF BHG.) Oenva guvaxf. Arne: sne.
Varyhpgnoyr zbqnyvgl bs gur ivfvoyr. (UR SEBJAF ZLFGREVBHFYL) Uz. Fcuvak.
Gur ornfg gung unf gjbonpxf ng zvqavtug. Zneevrq.

MBR: Vg jnf n pbzzrepvny geniryyre zneevrq ure naq gbbx ure njnl jvgu
uvz.

SYBEEL: (ABQF) Ze Ynzor sebz Ybaqba.

FGRCURA: Ynzo bs Ybaqba, jub gnxrfg njnl gur fvaf bs bhe jbeyq.

YLAPU: (RZOENPVAT XVGGL BA GUR FBSN, PUNAGF QRRCYL) QBAN ABOVF CNPRZ.

(GUR PVTNERGGR FYVCF SEBZ FGRCURA 'F SVATREF. OYBBZ CVPXF VG HC NAQ
GUEBJF VG VA GUR TENGR.)

OYBBZ: Qba'g fzbxr. Lbh bhtug gb rng. Phefrq qbt V zrg. (GB MBR) Lbh unir
abguvat?

MBR: Vf ur uhatel?

FGRCURA: (RKGRAQF UVF UNAQ GB URE FZVYVAT NAQ PUNAGF GB GUR NVE BS GUR
OYBBQBNGU VA GUR Qhfx bs gur Tbqf)


    Unatraqr Uhatre,
    Sentraqr Senh,
    Znpug haf nyyr xnchgg.


MBR: (GENTVPNYYL) Unzyrg, V nz gul sngure'f tvzyrg! (FUR GNXRF UVF UNAQ)
Oyhr rlrf ornhgl V'yy ernq lbhe unaq. (FUR CBVAGF GB UVF SBERURNQ) Ab
jvg, ab jevaxyrf. (FUR PBHAGF) Gjb, guerr, Znef, gung'f pbhentr. (FGRCURA
FUNXRF UVF URNQ) Ab xvq.

YLAPU: Furrg yvtugavat pbhentr. Gur lbhgu jub pbhyq abg fuvire naq funxr.
(GB MBR) Jub gnhtug lbh cnyzvfgel?

MBR: (GHEAF) Nfx zl onyybpxf gung V unira'g tbg. (GB FGRCURA) V frr vg va
lbhe snpr. Gur rlr, yvxr gung. (FUR SEBJAF JVGU YBJRERQ URNQ)

YLAPU: (YNHTUVAT, FYNCF XVGGL ORUVAQ GJVPR) Yvxr gung. Cnaqlong.

(GJVPR YBHQYL N CNAQLONG PENPXF, GUR PBSSVA BS GUR CVNABYN SYVRF BCRA,
GUR ONYQ YVGGYR EBHAQ WNPX-VA-GUR-OBK URNQ BS SNGURE QBYNA FCEVATF HC.)

SNGURE QBYNA: Nal obl jnag sybttvat? Oebxr uvf tynffrf? Ynml vqyr yvggyr
fpurzre. Frr vg va lbhe rlr.

(ZVYQ, ORAVTA, ERPGBEVNY, ERCEBIVAT, GUR URNQ BS QBA WBUA PBAZRR EVFRF
SEBZ GUR CVNABYN PBSSVA.)

QBA WBUA PBAZRR: Abj, Sngure Qbyna! Abj. V'z fher gung Fgrcura vf n irel
tbbq yvggyr obl!

MBR: (RKNZVAVAT FGRCURA'F CNYZ) Jbzna'f unaq.

FGRCURA: (ZHEZHEF) Pbagvahr. Yvr. Ubyq zr. Pnerff. V arire pbhyq ernq Uvf
unaqjevgvat rkprcg Uvf pevzvany guhzocevag ba gur unqqbpx.

MBR: Jung qnl jrer lbh obea?

FGRCURA: Guhefqnl. Gbqnl.

MBR: Guhefqnl'f puvyq unf sne gb tb. (FUR GENPRF YVARF BA UVF UNAQ) Yvar
bs sngr. Vasyhragvny sevraqf.

SYBEEL: (CBVAGVAT) Vzntvangvba.

MBR: Zbhag bs gur zbba. Lbh'yy zrrg jvgu n ... (FUR CRREF NG UVF UNAQF
NOEHCGYL) V jba'g gryy lbh jung'f abg tbbq sbe lbh. Be qb lbh jnag gb
xabj?

OYBBZ: (QRGNPURF URE SVATREF NAQ BSSREF UVF CNYZ) Zber unez guna tbbq.
Urer. Ernq zvar.

ORYYN: Fubj. (FUR GHEAF HC OYBBZ'F UNAQ) V gubhtug fb. Xabool xahpxyrf
sbe gur jbzra.

MBR: (CRREVAT NG OYBBZ'F CNYZ) Tevqveba. Geniryf orlbaq gur frn naq zneel
zbarl.

OYBBZ: Jebat.

MBR: (DHVPXYL) B, V frr. Fubeg yvggyr svatre. Uracrpxrq uhfonaq. Gung
jebat?

(OYNPX YVM, N UHTR EBBFGRE UNGPUVAT VA N PUNYXRQ PVEPYR, EVFRF, FGERGPURF
URE JVATF NAQ PYHPXF.)

OYNPX YVM: Tnen. Xybbx. Xybbx. Xybbx.

(FUR FVQYRF SEBZ URE ARJYNVQ RTT NAQ JNQQYRF BSS)

OYBBZ: (CBVAGF GB UVF UNAQ) Gung jrny gurer vf na nppvqrag. Sryy naq phg
vg gjraglgjb lrnef ntb. V jnf fvkgrra.

MBR: V frr, fnlf gur oyvaq zna. Gryy hf arjf.

FGRCURA: Frr? Zbirf gb bar terng tbny. V nz gjraglgjb. Fvkgrra lrnef ntb
ur jnf gjraglgjb gbb. Fvkgrra lrnef ntb V gjraglgjb ghzoyrq. Gjraglgjb
lrnef ntb ur fvkgrra sryy bss uvf uboolubefr. (UR JVAPRF) Uheg zl unaq
fbzrjurer. Zhfg frr n qragvfg. Zbarl?

(MBR JUVFCREF GB SYBEEL. GURL TVTTYR. OYBBZ ERYRNFRF UVF UNAQ NAQ JEVGRF
VQYL BA GUR GNOYR VA ONPXUNAQ, CRAPVYYVAT FYBJ PHEIRF.)

SYBEEL: Jung?

(N UNPXARLPNE, AHZORE GUERR UHAQERQ NAQ GJRAGLSBHE, JVGU N
TNYYNAGOHGGBPXRQ ZNER, QEVIRA OL WNZRF ONEGBA, UNEZBAL NIRAHR,
QBAALOEBBX, GEBGF CNFG. OYNMRF OBLYNA NAQ YRARUNA FCENJY FJNLVAT BA GUR
FVQRFRNGF. GUR BEZBAQ OBBGF PEBHPURF ORUVAQ BA GUR NKYR. FNQYL BIRE GUR
PEBFFOYVAQ YLQVN QBHPR NAQ ZVAN XRAARQL TNMR.)

GUR OBBGF: (WBTTVAT, ZBPXF GURZ JVGU GUHZO NAQ JEVTTYVAT JBEZSVATREF) Unj
unj unir lbh gur ubea?

(OEBAMR OL TBYQ GURL JUVFCRE.)

MBR: (GB SYBEEL) Juvfcre.

(GURL JUVFCRE NTNVA)

(BIRE GUR JRYY BS GUR PNE OYNMRF OBLYNA YRNAF, UVF OBNGRE FGENJ FRG
FVQRJNLF, N ERQ SYBJRE VA UVF ZBHGU. YRARUNA VA LNPUGFZNA'F PNC NAQ JUVGR
FUBRF BSSVPVBHFYL QRGNPURF N YBAT UNVE SEBZ OYNMRF OBLYNA'F PBNG
FUBHYQRE.)

YRARUNA: Ub! Jung qb V urer orubyq? Jrer lbh oehfuvat gur pbojrof bss n
srj dhvzf?

OBLYNA: (FRNGRQ, FZVYRF) Cyhpxvat n ghexrl.

YRARUNA: N tbbq avtug'f jbex.

OBLYNA: (UBYQVAT HC SBHE GUVPX OYHAGHATHYNGRQ SVATREF, JVAXF) Oynmrf
Xngr! Hc gb fnzcyr be lbhe zbarl onpx. (UR UBYQF BHG N SBERSVATRE) Fzryy
gung.

YRARUNA: (FZRYYF TYRRSHYYL) Nu! Ybofgre naq znlbaanvfr. Nu!

MBR NAQ SYBEEL: (YNHTU GBTRGURE) Un un un un.

OBLYNA: (WHZCF FHERYL SEBZ GUR PNE NAQ PNYYF YBHQYL SBE NYY GB URNE)
Uryyb, Oybbz! Zef Oybbz qerffrq lrg?

OYBBZ: (VA SYHAXRL'F CEHAR CYHFU PBNG NAQ XARROERRPURF, OHSS FGBPXVATF
NAQ CBJQRERQ JVT) V'z nsenvq abg, fve. Gur ynfg negvpyrf ...

OBLYNA: (GBFFRF UVZ FVKCRAPR) Urer, gb ohl lbhefrys n tva naq fcynfu. (UR
UNATF UVF UNG FZNEGYL BA N CRT BS OYBBZ'F NAGYRERQ URNQ) Fubj zr va. V
unir n yvggyr cevingr ohfvarff jvgu lbhe jvsr, lbh haqrefgnaq?

OYBBZ: Gunax lbh, fve. Lrf, fve. Znqnz Gjrrql vf va ure ongu, fve.

ZNEVBA: Ur bhtug gb srry uvzfrys uvtuyl ubabherq. (FUR CYBCF FCYNFUVAT
BHG BS GUR JNGRE) Enbhy qneyvat, pbzr naq qel zr. V'z va zl cryg. Bayl zl
arj ung naq n pneevntr fcbatr.

OBLYNA: (N ZREEL GJVAXYR VA UVF RLR) Gbccvat!

ORYYN: Jung? Jung vf vg?

(MBR JUVFCREF GB URE.)

ZNEVBA: Yrg uvz ybbx, gur cvfubthr! Cvzc! Naq fpbhetr uvzfrys! V'yy jevgr
gb n cbjreshy cebfgvghgr be Onegubybzban, gur orneqrq jbzna, gb envfr
jrnyf bhg ba uvz na vapu guvpx naq znxr uvz oevat zr onpx n fvtarq naq
fgnzcrq erprvcg.

OBLYNA: (pynfcf uvzfrys) Urer, V pna'g ubyq guvf yvggyr ybg zhpu ybatre.
(ur fgevqrf bss ba fgvss pninyel yrtf)

ORYYN: (YNHTUVAT) Ub ub ub ub.

OBLYNA: (GB OYBBZ, BIRE UVF FUBHYQRE) Lbh pna nccyl lbhe rlr gb gur
xrlubyr naq cynl jvgu lbhefrys juvyr V whfg tb guebhtu ure n srj gvzrf.

OYBBZ: Gunax lbh, fve. V jvyy, fve. Znl V oevat gjb zra puhzf gb jvgarff
gur qrrq naq gnxr n fancfubg? (UR UBYQF BHG NA BVAGZRAG WNE) Infryvar,
fve? Benatrsybjre ...? Yhxrjnez jngre ...?

XVGGL: (SEBZ GUR FBSN) Gryy hf, Sybeel. Gryy hf. Jung.

(SYBEEL JUVFCREF GB URE. JUVFCREVAT YBIRJBEQF ZHEZHE, YVCYNCCVAT YBHQYL,
CBCCLFZVP CYBCFYBC.)

ZVAN XRAARQL: (URE RLRF HCGHEARQ) B, vg zhfg or yvxr gur fprag bs
trenavhzf naq ybiryl crnpurf! B, ur fvzcyl vqbyvfrf rirel ovg bs ure!
Fghpx gbtrgure! Pbirerq jvgu xvffrf!

YLQVN QBHPR: (URE ZBHGU BCRAVAT) Lhzlhz. B, ur'f pneelvat ure ebhaq gur
ebbz qbvat vg! Evqr n pbpxubefr. Lbh pbhyq urne gurz va Cnevf naq Arj
Lbex. Yvxr zbhgushyf bs fgenjoreevrf naq pernz.

XVGGL: (YNHTUVAT) Urr urr urr.

OBLYNA'F IBVPR: (FJRRGYL, UBNEFRYL, VA GUR CVG BS UVF FGBZNPU) Nu!
Tbboynmdehx oehxnepuxenfug!

ZNEVBA'F IBVPR: (UBNEFRYL, FJRRGYL, EVFVAT GB URE GUEBNG) B!
Jrrfujnfugxvffvancbbvfguancbbuhpx?

OYBBZ: (UVF RLRF JVYQYL QVYNGRQ, PYNFCF UVZFRYS) Fubj! Uvqr! Fubj! Cybhtu
ure! Zber! Fubbg!

ORYYN, MBR, SYBEEL, XVGGL: Ub ub! Un un! Urr urr!

YLAPU: (CBVAGF) Gur zveebe hc gb angher. (UR YNHTUF) Uh uh uh uh uh!

(FGRCURA NAQ OYBBZ TNMR VA GUR ZVEEBE. GUR SNPR BS JVYYVNZ FUNXRFCRNER,
ORNEQYRFF, NCCRNEF GURER, EVTVQ VA SNPVNY CNENYLFVF, PEBJARQ OL GUR
ERSYRPGVBA BS GUR ERVAQRRE NAGYRERQ UNGENPX VA GUR UNYY.)

FUNXRFCRNER: (VA QVTAVSVRQ IRAGEVYBDHL) 'Gvf gur ybhq ynhtu orfcrnxf gur
inpnag zvaq. (GB OYBBZ) Gubh gubhtugrfg nf ubj gubh jnfgrfg vaivfvoyr.
Tnmr. (UR PEBJF JVGU N OYNPX PNCBA'F YNHTU) Vntbtb! Ubj zl Byqsryybj
pubxvg uvf Guhefqnlzbeaha. Vntbtbtb!

OYBBZ: (FZVYRF LRYYBJYL NG GUR GUERR JUBERF) Jura jvyy V urne gur wbxr?

MBR: Orsber lbh'er gjvpr zneevrq naq bapr n jvqbjre.

OYBBZ: Yncfrf ner pbaqbarq. Rira gur terng Ancbyrba jura zrnfherzragf
jrer gnxra arkg gur fxva nsgre uvf qrngu ...

(ZEF QVTANZ, JVQBJ JBZNA, URE FAHOABFR NAQ PURRXF SYHFURQ JVGU QRNGUGNYX,
GRNEF NAQ GHAARL'F GNJAL FUREEL, UHEEVRF OL VA URE JRRQF, URE OBAARG
NJEL, EBHTVAT NAQ CBJQREVAT URE PURRXF, YVCF NAQ ABFR, N CRA PUVIILVAT
URE OEBBQ BS PLTARGF. ORARNGU URE FXVEG NCCRNE URE YNGR UHFONAQ'F
RIRELQNL GEBHFREF NAQ GHEARQHC OBBGF, YNETR RVTUGF. FUR UBYQF N FPBGGVFU
JVQBJF' VAFHENAPR CBYVPL NAQ N YNETR ZNEDHRR HZOERYYN HAQRE JUVPU URE
OEBBQ EHA JVGU URE, CNGFL UBCCVAT BA BAR FUBQ SBBG, UVF PBYYNE YBBFR, N
UNAX BS CBEXFGRNXF QNATYVAT, SERQQL JUVZCREVAT, FHFL JVGU N PELVAT PBQ'F
ZBHGU, NYVPR FGEHTTYVAT JVGU GUR ONOL. FUR PHSSF GURZ BA, URE FGERNZREF
SYNHAGVAT NYBSG.)

SERQQL: Nu, zn, lbh'er qenttvat zr nybat!

FHFL: Znzzn, gur orrsgrn vf svmmvat bire!

FUNXRFCRNER: (JVGU CNENYLGVP ENTR) Jrqn frpn jubxvyyn snefg.

(GUR SNPR BS ZNEGVA PHAAVATUNZ, ORNEQRQ, ERSRNGHERF FUNXRFCRNER'F
ORNEQYRFF SNPR. GUR ZNEDHRR HZOERYYN FJNLF QEHAXRAYL, GUR PUVYQERA EHA
NFVQR. HAQRE GUR HZOERYYN NCCRNEF ZEF PHAAVATUNZ VA ZREEL JVQBJ UNG NAQ
XVZBAB TBJA. FUR TYVQRF FVQYVAT NAQ OBJVAT, GJVEYVAT WNCNARFVYL.)

ZEF PHAAVATUNZ: (FVATF)


    Naq gurl pnyy zr gur wrjry bs Nfvn!


ZNEGVA PHAAVATUNZ: (TNMRF BA URE, VZCNFFVIR) Vzzrafr! Zbfg oybbql njshy
qrzverc!

FGRCURA: RG RKNYGNOHAGHE PBEAHN VHFGV. Dhrraf ynl jvgu cevmr ohyyf.
Erzrzore Cnfvcunr sbe jubfr yhfg zl tenaqbyqtebffsngure znqr gur svefg
pbasrffvbaobk. Sbetrg abg Znqnz Tevffry Fgrriraf abe gur fhvar fpvbaf bs
gur ubhfr bs Ynzoreg. Naq Abnu jnf qehax jvgu jvar. Naq uvf nex jnf bcra.

ORYYN: Abar bs gung urer. Pbzr gb gur jebat fubc.

YLAPU: Yrg uvz nybar. Ur'f onpx sebz Cnevf.

MBR: (EHAF GB FGRCURA NAQ YVAXF UVZ) B tb ba! Tvir hf fbzr cneyrlibb.

(FGRCURA PYNCF UNG BA URNQ NAQ YRNCF BIRE GB GUR SVERCYNPR JURER UR
FGNAQF JVGU FUEHTTRQ FUBHYQREF, SVAAL UNAQF BHGFCERNQ, N CNVAGRQ FZVYR BA
UVF SNPR.)

YLAPU: (CBZZRYYVAT BA GUR FBSN) Ezz Ezz Ezz Eeeeeezzzz.

FGRCURA: (TNOOYRF JVGU ZNEVBARGGR WREXF) Gubhfnaq cynprf bs ragregnvazrag
gb rkcrafr lbhe riravatf jvgu ybiryl ynqvrf fnyvat tybirf naq bgure
guvatf creuncf uref urneg orrepubcf cresrpg snfuvbanoyr ubhfr irel
rppragevp jurer ybgf pbpbggrf ornhgvshy qerffrq zhpu nobhg cevaprffrf
yvxr ner qnapvat pnapna naq jnyxvat gurer cnevfvna pybjarevrf rkgen
sbbyvfu sbe onpurybef sbervtaf gur fnzr vs gnyxvat n cbbe ratyvfu ubj
zhpu fzneg gurl ner ba guvatf ybir naq frafngvbaf ibyhcghbhf. Zvfgref
irel fryrpgf sbe vf cyrnfher zhfg gb ivfvg urnira naq uryy fubj jvgu
zbeghnel pnaqyrf naq gurl grnef fvyire juvpu bpphe rirel avtug. Cresrpgyl
fubpxvat greevsvp bs eryvtvba'f guvatf zbpxrel frra va havirefny jbeyq.
Nyy puvp jbznaf juvpu neevir shyy bs zbqrfgl gura qvfebor naq fdhrny ybhq
gb frr inzcver zna qronhpu aha irel serfu lbhat jvgu QRFFBHF GEBHOYNAGF.
(UR PYNPXF UVF GBATHR YBHQYL) UB, YN YN! PR CVS DH'VY N!

YLAPU: IVIR YR INZCVER!

GUR JUBERF: Oenib! Cneyrlibb!

FGRCURA: (TEVZNPVAT JVGU URNQ ONPX, YNHTUF YBHQYL, PYNCCVAT UVZFRYS)
Terng fhpprff bs ynhtuvat. Natryf zhpu cebfgvghgrf yvxr naq ubyl ncbfgyrf
ovt qnza ehssvnaf. QRZVZBAQNVARF avpryl unaqfbzr fcnexyvat bs qvnzbaqf
irel nzvnoyr pbfghzrq. Be qb lbh ner sbaq orggre jung orybatf gurl
zbqreaf cyrnfher ghecvghqr bs byq znaf? (UR CBVAGF NOBHG UVZ JVGU
TEBGRFDHR TRFGHERF JUVPU YLAPU NAQ GUR JUBERF ERCYL GB) Pnbhgpubhp fgnghr
jbzna erirefvoyr be yvsrfvmr gbzcrrcgbz bs ivetvaf ahqvgvrf irel yrfovp
gur xvff svir gra gvzrf. Ragre, tragyrzna, gb frr va zveebe rirel
cbfvgvbaf gencrmrf nyy gung znpuvar gurer orfvqrf nyfb vs qrfver npg
njshyyl orfgvny ohgpure'f obl cbyyhgrf va jnez irny yvire be bzyrg ba gur
oryyl CVRPR QR FUNXRFCRNER.

ORYYN: (PYNCCVAT URE ORYYL FVAXF ONPX BA GUR FBSN, JVGU N FUBHG BS
YNHTUGRE) Na bzryrggr ba gur ... Ub! ub! ub! ub! ... bzryrggr ba gur ...

FGRCURA: (ZVAPVATYL) V ybir lbh, fve qneyvat. Fcrnx lbh ratyvfuzna gbathr
sbe QBHOYR RAGRAGR PBEQVNYR. B lrf, ZBA YBHC. Ubj zhpu pbfg? Jngreybb.
Jngrepybfrg. (UR PRNFRF FHQQRAYL NAQ UBYQF HC N SBERSVATRE)

ORYYN: (YNHTUVAT) Bzryrggr ...

GUR JUBERF: (YNHTUVAT) Rapber! Rapber!

FGRCURA: Znex zr. V qernzg bs n jngrezryba.

MBR: Tb noebnq naq ybir n sbervta ynql.

YLAPU: Npebff gur jbeyq sbe n jvsr.

SYBEEL: Qernzf tbrf ol pbagenevrf.

FGRCURA: (RKGRAQF UVF NEZF) Vg jnf urer. Fgerrg bs uneybgf. Va Frecragvar
nirahr Orrymroho fubjrq zr ure, n shofl jvqbj. Jurer'f gur erq pnecrg
fcernq?

OYBBZ: (NCCEBNPUVAT FGRCURA) Ybbx ...

FGRCURA: Ab, V syrj. Zl sbrf orarngu zr. Naq rire funyy or. Jbeyq jvgubhg
raq. (UR PEVRF) CNGRE! Serr!

OYBBZ: V fnl, ybbx ...

FGRCURA: Oernx zl fcvevg, jvyy ur? B ZREQR NYBEF! (UR PEVRF, UVF IHYGHER
GNYBAF FUNECRARQ) Ubyn!  Uvyylub!

(FVZBA QRQNYHF' IBVPR UVYYBRF VA NAFJRE, FBZRJUNG FYRRCL OHG ERNQL.)

FVZBA: Gung'f nyy evtug. (UR FJBBCF HAPREGNVAYL GUEBHTU GUR NVE,
JURRYVAT, HGGREVAT PEVRF BS URNEGRAVAT, BA FGEBAT CBAQREBHF OHMMNEQ
JVATF) Ub, obl! Ner lbh tbvat gb jva? Ubbc! Cfpungg! Fgnoyr jvgu gubfr
unyspnfgrf. Jbhyqa'g yrg gurz jvguva gur onjy bs na nff. Urnq hc! Xrrc
bhe synt sylvat! Na rntyr thyrf ibynag va n svryq netrag qvfcynlrq.
Hyfgre xvat ng nezf! Unvubbc! (UR ZNXRF GUR ORNTYR'F PNYY, TVIVAT GBATHR)
Ohyohy! Oheoyoyoheoyoy! Unv, obl!

(GUR SEBAQF NAQ FCNPRF BS GUR JNYYCNCRE SVYR ENCVQYL NPEBFF PBHAGEL. N
FGBHG SBK, QENJA SEBZ PBIREG, OEHFU CBVAGRQ, UNIVAT OHEVRQ UVF
TENAQZBGURE, EHAF FJVSG SBE GUR BCRA, OEVTUGRLRQ, FRRXVAT ONQTRE RNEGU,
HAQRE GUR YRNIRF. GUR CNPX BS FGNTUBHAQF SBYYBJF, ABFR GB GUR TEBHAQ,
FAVSSVAT GURVE DHNEEL, ORNTYRONLVAT, OHEOYOEOYVAT GB OR OYBBQRQ. JNEQ
HAVBA UHAGFZRA NAQ UHAGFJBZRA YVIR JVGU GURZ, UBG SBE N XVYY. SEBZ FVK
ZVYR CBVAG, SYNGUBHFR, AVAR ZVYR FGBAR SBYYBJ GUR SBBGCRBCYR JVGU XABGGL
FGVPXF, UNLSBEXF, FNYZBATNSSF, YNFFBF, SYBPXZNFGREF JVGU FGBPXJUVCF,
ORNEONVGREF JVGU GBZGBZF, GBERNQBEF JVGU OHYYFJBEQF, TERLARTEBRF JNIVAT
GBEPURF. GUR PEBJQ ONJYF BS QVPREF, PEBJA NAQ NAPUBE CYNLREF,
GUVZOYREVTTREF, OEBNQFZRA. PEBJF NAQ GBHGF, UBNEFR OBBXVRF VA UVTU JVMNEQ
UNGF PYNZBHE QRNSRAVATYL.)

GUR PEBJQ:


    Pneq bs gur enprf. Enpvat pneq!
    Gra gb bar gur svryq!
    Gbzzl ba gur pynl urer! Gbzzl ba gur pynl!
    Gra gb bar one bar! Gra gb bar one bar!
    Gel lbhe yhpx ba Fcvaavat Wraal!
    Gra gb bar one bar!
    Fryy gur zbaxrl, oblf! Fryy gur zbaxrl!
    V'yy tvir gra gb bar!
    Gra gb bar one bar!


(N QNEX UBEFR, EVQREYRFF, OBYGF YVXR N CUNAGBZ CNFG GUR JVAAVATCBFG, UVF
ZNAR ZBBASBNZVAT, UVF RLRONYYF FGNEF. GUR SVRYQ SBYYBJF, N OHAPU BS
OHPXVAT ZBHAGF. FXRYRGBA UBEFRF, FPRCGER, ZNKVZHZ GUR FRPBAQ, MVASNAQRY,
GUR QHXR BS JRFGZVAFGRE'F FUBGBIRE, ERCHYFR, GUR QHXR BS ORNHSBEG'F
PRLYBA, CEVK QR CNEVF. QJNESF EVQR GURZ, EHFGLNEZBHERQ, YRNCVAT, YRNCVAT
VA GURVE, VA GURVE FNQQYRF. YNFG VA N QEVMMYR BS ENVA BA N OEBXRAJVAQRQ
VFNORYYR ANT, PBPX BS GUR ABEGU, GUR SNIBHEVGR, UBARL PNC, TERRA WNPXRG,
BENATR FYRRIRF, TNEERGG QRNFL HC, TEVCCVAT GUR ERVAF, N UBPXRLFGVPX NG
GUR ERNQL. UVF ANT BA FCNIVARQ JUVGRTNVGRERQ SRRG WBTF NYBAT GUR EBPXL
EBNQ.)

GUR BENATR YBQTRF: (WRREVAT) Trg qbja naq chfu, zvfgre. Ynfg ync! Lbh'yy
or ubzr gur avtug!

TNEERGG QRNFL: (OBYG HCEVTUG, UVF ANVYFPENCRQ SNPR CYNFGRERQ JVGU
CBFGNTRFGNZCF, OENAQVFURF UVF UBPXRLFGVPX, UVF OYHR RLRF SYNFUVAT VA GUR
CEVFZ BS GUR PUNAQRYVRE NF UVF ZBHAG YBCRF OL NG FPUBBYVAT TNYYBC)

CRE IVNF ERPGNF!

(N LBXR BS OHPXRGF YRBCNEQF NYY BIRE UVZ NAQ UVF ERNEVAT ANT N GBEERAG BS
ZHGGBA OEBGU JVGU QNAPVAT PBVAF BS PNEEBGF, ONEYRL, BAVBAF, GHEAVCF,
CBGNGBRF.)

GUR TERRA YBQTRF: Fbsg qnl, fve Wbua! Fbsg qnl, lbhe ubabhe!

(CEVINGR PNEE, CEVINGR PBZCGBA NAQ PVFFL PNSSERL CNFF ORARNGU GUR
JVAQBJF, FVATVAT VA QVFPBEQ.)

FGRCURA: Unex! Bhe sevraq abvfr va gur fgerrg.

MBR: (UBYQF HC URE UNAQ) Fgbc!

CEVINGR PNEE, CEVINGR PBZCGBA NAQ PVFFL PNSSERL:


    Lrg V'ir n fbeg n
    Lbexfuver eryvfu sbe ...


MBR: Gung'f zr. (FUR PYNCF URE UNAQF) Qnapr! Qnapr! (FUR EHAF GB GUR
CVNABYN) Jub unf gjbcrapr?

OYBBZ: Jub'yy ...?

YLAPU: (UNAQVAT URE PBVAF) Urer.

FGRCURA: (PENPXVAT UVF SVATREF VZCNGVRAGYL) Dhvpx! Dhvpx! Jurer'f zl
nhthe'f ebq? (UR EHAF GB GUR CVNAB NAQ GNXRF UVF NFUCYNAG, ORNGVAT UVF
SBBG VA GEVCHQVHZ)

MBR: (GHEAF GUR QEHZUNAQYR) Gurer.

(FUR QEBCF GJB CRAAVRF VA GUR FYBG. TBYQ, CVAX NAQ IVBYRG YVTUGF FGNEG
SBEGU. GUR QEHZ GHEAF CHEEVAT VA YBJ URFVGNGVBA JNYGM. CEBSRFFBE TBBQJVA,
VA N OBJXABGGRQ CREVJVT, VA PBHEG QERFF, JRNEVAT N FGNVARQ VAIREARFF
PNCR, ORAG VA GJB SEBZ VAPERQVOYR NTR, GBGGREF NPEBFF GUR EBBZ, UVF UNAQF
SYHGGREVAT. UR FVGF GVAVYL BA GUR CVNABFGBBY NAQ YVSGF NAQ ORNGF UNAQYRFF
FGVPXF BS NEZF BA GUR XRLOBNEQ, ABQQVAT JVGU QNZFRY'F TENPR, UVF OBJXABG
OBOOVAT)

MBR: (GJVEYF EBHAQ UREFRYS, URRYGNCCVAT) Qnapr. Nalobql urer sbe gurer?
Jub'yy qnapr? Pyrne gur gnoyr.

(GUR CVNABYN JVGU PUNATVAT YVTUGF CYNLF VA JNYGM GVZR GUR CERYHQR BS Zl
Tvey'f n Lbexfuver Tvey. FGRCURA GUEBJF UVF NFUCYNAG BA GUR GNOYR NAQ
FRVMRF MBR EBHAQ GUR JNVFG. SYBEEL NAQ ORYYN CHFU GUR GNOYR GBJNEQF GUR
SVERCYNPR. FGRCURA, NEZVAT MBR JVGU RKNTTRENGRQ TENPR, ORTVAF GB JNYGM
URE EBHAQ GUR EBBZ. OYBBZ FGNAQF NFVQR. URE FYRRIR SVYYVAT SEBZ TENPVAT
NEZF ERIRNYF N JUVGR SYRFUSYBJRE BS INPPVANGVBA. ORGJRRA GUR PHEGNVAF
CEBSRFFBE ZNTVAAV VAFREGF N YRT BA GUR GBRCBVAG BS JUVPU FCVAF N FVYX
UNG. JVGU N QRSG XVPX UR FRAQF VG FCVAAVAT GB UVF PEBJA NAQ WNHAGLUNGGRQ
FXNGRF VA. UR JRNEF N FYNGR SEBPXPBNG JVGU PYNERG FVYX YNCRYF, N TBETRG
BS PERNZ GHYYR, N TERRA YBJPHG JNVFGPBNG, FGBPX PBYYNE JVGU JUVGR
XREPUVRS, GVTUG YNIRAQRE GEBHFREF, CNGRAG CHZCF NAQ PNANEL TYBIRF. VA UVF
OHGGBAUBYR VF NA VZZRAFR QNUYVN. UR GJVEYF VA ERIREFRQ QVERPGVBAF N
PYBHQRQ PNAR, GURA JRQTRF VG GVTUG VA UVF BKGRE. UR CYNPRF N UNAQ YVTUGYL
BA UVF OERNFGOBAR, OBJF, NAQ SBAQYRF UVF SYBJRE NAQ OHGGBAF.)

ZNTVAAV: Gur cbrgel bs zbgvba, neg bs pnyvfguravpf. Ab pbaarpgvba jvgu
Znqnz Yrttrg Olear'f be Yrirafgba'f. Snapl qerff onyyf neenatrq.
Qrcbegzrag. Gur Xnggl Ynaare fgrc. Fb. Jngpu zr! Zl grecfvpuberna
novyvgvrf. (UR ZVAHRGF SBEJNEQ GUERR CNPRF BA GEVCCVAT ORR'F SRRG) GBHG
YR ZBAQR RA NINAG! ERIRERAPR! GBHG YR ZBAQR RA CYNPR!

(GUR CERYHQR PRNFRF. CEBSRFFBE TBBQJVA, ORNGVAT INTHR NEZF FUEVIRYF,
FVAXF, UVF YVIR PNCR SVYYVAT NOBHG GUR FGBBY. GUR NVE VA SVEZRE JNYGM
GVZR FBHAQF. FGRCURA NAQ MBR PVEPYR SERRYL. GUR YVTUGF PUNATR, TYBJ, SVQR
TBYQ EBFL IVBYRG.)

GUR CVNABYN:


    Gjb lbhat sryybjf jrer gnyxvat nobhg gurve tveyf, tveyf, tveyf,
    Fjrrgurnegf gurl'q yrsg oruvaq ...


(SEBZ N PBEARE GUR ZBEAVAT UBHEF EHA BHG, TBYQUNVERQ, FYVZFNAQNYYRQ, VA
TVEYVFU OYHR, JNFCJNVFGRQ, JVGU VAABPRAG UNAQF. AVZOYL GURL QNAPR,
GJVEYVAT GURVE FXVCCVAT EBCRF. GUR UBHEF BS ABBA SBYYBJ VA NZORE TBYQ.
YNHTUVAT, YVAXRQ, UVTU UNVEPBZOF SYNFUVAT, GURL PNGPU GUR FHA VA ZBPXVAT
ZVEEBEF, YVSGVAT GURVE NEZF.)

ZNTVAAV: (PYVCPYNCF TYBIRFVYRAG UNAQF) PNEER! NINAG QRHK! Oerngur rirayl!
ONYNAPR!

(GUR ZBEAVAT NAQ ABBA UBHEF JNYGM VA GURVE CYNPRF, GHEAVAT, NQINAPVAT GB
RNPU BGURE, FUNCVAT GURVE PHEIRF, OBJVAT IVFNIVF. PNINYVREF ORUVAQ GURZ
NEPU NAQ FHFCRAQ GURVE NEZF, JVGU UNAQF QRFPRAQVAT GB, GBHPUVAT, EVFVAT
SEBZ GURVE FUBHYQREF.)

UBHEF: Lbh znl gbhpu zl.

PNINYVREF: Znl V gbhpu lbhe?

UBHEF: B, ohg yvtugyl!

PNINYVREF: B, fb yvtugyl!

GUR CVNABYN:


    Zl yvggyr ful yvggyr ynff unf n jnvfg.


(MBR NAQ FGRCURA GHEA OBYQYL JVGU YBBFRE FJVAT. GUR GJVYVTUG UBHEF
NQINAPR SEBZ YBAT YNAQFUNQBJF, QVFCREFRQ, YNTTVAT, YNATHVQRLRQ, GURVE
PURRXF QRYVPNGR JVGU PVCEVN NAQ SNYFR SNVAG OYBBZ. GURL NER VA TERL TNHMR
JVGU QNEX ONG FYRRIRF GUNG SYHGGRE VA GUR YNAQ OERRMR.)

ZNTVAAV: NINAG UHVG! GENIREFR! FNYHG! PBHEF QR ZNVAF! PEBVFR!

(GUR AVTUG UBHEF, BAR OL BAR, FGRNY GB GUR YNFG CYNPR. ZBEAVAT, ABBA NAQ
GJVYVTUG UBHEF ERGERNG ORSBER GURZ. GURL NER ZNFXRQ, JVGU QNTTRERQ UNVE
NAQ OENPRYRGF BS QHYY ORYYF. JRNEL GURL PHEPULPHEPUL HAQRE IRVYF.)

GUR OENPRYRGF: Urvtub! Urvtub!

MBR: (GJVEYVAT, URE UNAQ GB URE OEBJ) B!

ZNTVAAV: YRF GVEBVEF! PUNVAR QR QNZRF! YN PBEORVYYR! QBF N QBF!

(NENORFDHVAT JRNEVYL GURL JRNIR N CNGGREA BA GUR SYBBE, JRNIVAT,
HAJRNIVAT, PHEGFRLVAT, GJVEYVAT, FVZCYL FJVEYVAT.)

MBR: V'z tvqql!

(FUR SERRF UREFRYS, QEBBCF BA N PUNVE. FGRCURA FRVMRF SYBEEL NAQ GHEAF
JVGU URE.)

ZNTVAAV: OBHYNATRER! YRF EBAQF! YRF CBAGF! PURINHK QR OBVF! RFPNETBGF!

(GJVAVAT, ERPRQVAT, JVGU VAGREPUNATVAT UNAQF GUR AVTUG UBHEF YVAX RNPU
RNPU JVGU NEPUVAT NEZF VA N ZBFNVP BS ZBIRZRAGF. FGRCURA NAQ SYBEEL GHEA
PHZOEBHFYL.)

ZNTVAAV: QNAFRM NIRP IBF QNZRF! PUNATRM QR QNZRF! QBAARM YR CRGVG OBHDHRG
N IBGER QNZR! ERZREPVRM!

GUR CVNABYN:


    Orfg, orfg bs nyy,
    Onennohz!


XVGGL: (WHZCF HC) B, gurl cynlrq gung ba gur uboolubefrf ng gur Zvehf
onmnne!

(FUR EHAF GB FGRCURA. UR YRNIRF SYBEEL OEHFDHRYL NAQ FRVMRF XVGGL. N
FPERNZVAT OVGGREA'F UNEFU UVTU JUVFGYR FUEVRXF. TEBNATEBHFRTHETYVAT
GBSG'F PHZOREFBZR JUVEYVTVT GHEAF FYBJYL GUR EBBZ EVTUG EBHAQNOBHG GUR
EBBZ.)

GUR CVNABYN:


    Zl tvey'f n Lbexfuver tvey.


MBR:


    Lbexfuver guebhtu naq guebhtu.


Pbzr ba nyy!

(FUR FRVMRF SYBEEL NAQ JNYGMRF URE.)

FGRCURA: CNF FRHY!

(UR JURRYF XVGGL VAGB YLAPU'F NEZF, FANGPURF HC UVF NFUCYNAG SEBZ GUR
GNOYR NAQ GNXRF GUR SYBBE. NYY JURRY JUVEY JNYGM GJVEY. OYBBZORYYN
XVGGLYLAPU SYBEELMBR WHWHOL JBZRA. FGRCURA JVGU UNG NFUCYNAG SEBTFCYVGF
VA ZVQQYR UVTUXVPXF JVGU FXLXVPXVAT ZBHGU FUHG UNAQ PYNFC CNEG HAQRE
GUVTU. JVGU PYNAT GVAXYR OBBZUNZZRE GNYYLUB UBEAOYBJRE OYHR TERRA LRYYBJ
SYNFURF GBSG'F PHZOREFBZR GHEAF JVGU UBOOLUBEFR EVQREF SEBZ TVYQRQ FANXRF
QNATYRQ, OBJRYF SNAQNATB YRNCVAT FCHEA FBVY SBBG NAQ SNYY NTNVA.)

GUR CVNABYN:


    Gubhtu fur'f n snpgbel ynff
    Naq jrnef ab snapl pybgurf.


(PYBFRPYHGPURQ FJVSG FJVSGRE JVGU TYNEROYNERSYNER FPHQQVAT GURL
FPBBGYBBGFUBBG YHZOREVAT OL. ONENNOHZ!)

GHGGV: Rapber! Ovf! Oenib! Rapber!

FVZBA: Guvax bs lbhe zbgure'f crbcyr!

FGRCURA: Qnapr bs qrngu.

(ONAT SERFU ONENAT ONAT BS YNPDHRL'F ORYY, UBEFR, ANT, FGRRE, CVTYVATF,
PBAZRR BA PUEVFGNFF, YNZR PEHGPU NAQ YRT FNVYBE VA PBPXOBNG NEZSBYQRQ
EBCRCHYYVAT UVGPUVAT FGNZC UBEACVCR GUEBHTU NAQ GUEBHTU. ONENNOHZ! BA
ANTF UBTF ORYYUBEFRF TNQNERAR FJVAR PBEAL VA PBSSVA FGRRY FUNEX FGBAR
BARUNAQYRQ ARYFBA GJB GEVPXVRF SENHRAMVZZRE CYHZFGNVARQ SEBZ CENZ SVYYVAT
ONJYVAT THZ UR'F N PUNZCVBA. SHFROYHR CRRE SEBZ ONEERY ERI. RIRAFBAT YBIR
BA UNPXARL WNHAG OYNMRF OYVAQ PBQQBHOYRQ OVPLPYREF QVYYL JVGU FABJPNXR AB
SNAPL PYBGURF. GURA VA YNFG FJVGPUONPX YHZOREVAT HC NAQ QBJA OHZC ZNFUGHO
FBEG BS IVPREBL NAQ ERVAR ERYVFU SBE GHOYHZORE OHZCFUVER EBFR. ONENNOHZ!)

(GUR PBHCYRF SNYY NFVQR. FGRCURA JUVEYF TVQQVYL. EBBZ JUVEYF ONPX. RLRF
PYBFRQ UR GBGGREF. ERQ ENVYF SYL FCNPRJNEQF. FGNEF NYY NEBHAQ FHAF GHEA
EBHAQNOBHG. OEVTUG ZVQTRF QNAPR BA JNYYF. UR FGBCF QRNQ.)

FGRCURA: Ub!

(FGRCURA'F ZBGURE, RZNPVNGRQ, EVFRF FGNEX GUEBHTU GUR SYBBE, VA YRCRE
TERL JVGU N JERNGU BS SNQRQ BENATROYBFFBZF NAQ N GBEA OEVQNY IRVY, URE
SNPR JBEA NAQ ABFRYRFF, TERRA JVGU TENIRZBHYQ. URE UNVE VF FPNAG NAQ
YNAX. FUR SVKRF URE OYHRPVEPYRQ UBYYBJ RLRFBPXRGF BA FGRCURA NAQ BCRAF
URE GBBGUYRFF ZBHGU HGGREVAT N FVYRAG JBEQ. N PUBVE BS IVETVAF NAQ
PBASRFFBEF FVAT IBVPRYRFFYL.)

GUR PUBVE:


    Yvyvngn ehgvynagvhz gr pbasrffbehz ...
    Vhovynagvhz gr ivetvahz ...


(SEBZ GUR GBC BS N GBJRE OHPX ZHYYVTNA, VA CNEGVPBYBHERQ WRFGRE'F QERFF
BS CHPR NAQ LRYYBJ NAQ PYBJA'F PNC JVGU PHEYVAT ORYY, FGNAQF TNCVAT NG
URE, N FZBXVAT OHGGRERQ FCYVG FPBAR VA UVF UNAQ.)

OHPX ZHYYVTNA: Fur'f ornfgyl qrnq. Gur cvgl bs vg! Zhyyvtna zrrgf gur
nssyvpgrq zbgure. (UR HCGHEAF UVF RLRF) Zrephevny Znynpuv!

GUR ZBGURE: (JVGU GUR FHOGYR FZVYR BS QRNGU'F ZNQARFF) V jnf bapr gur
ornhgvshy Znl Tbhyqvat. V nz qrnq.

FGRCURA: (UBEEBEFGEHPX) Yrzhe, jub ner lbh? Ab. Jung obtrlzna'f gevpx vf
guvf?

OHPX ZHYYVTNA: (FUNXRF UVF PHEYVAT PNCORYY) Gur zbpxrel bs vg! Xvapu
qbtfobql xvyyrq ure ovgpuobql. Fur xvpxrq gur ohpxrg. (GRNEF BS ZBYGRA
OHGGRE SNYY SEBZ UVF RLRF BA GB GUR FPBAR) Bhe terng fjrrg zbgure! RCV
BVABCN CBAGBA.

GUR ZBGURE: (PBZRF ARNERE, OERNGUVAT HCBA UVZ FBSGYL URE OERNGU BS JRGGRQ
NFURF) Nyy zhfg tb guebhtu vg, Fgrcura. Zber jbzra guna zra va gur jbeyq.
Lbh gbb. Gvzr jvyy pbzr.

FGRCURA: (PUBXVAT JVGU SEVTUG, ERZBEFR NAQ UBEEBE) Gurl fnl V xvyyrq lbh,
zbgure. Ur bssraqrq lbhe zrzbel. Pnapre qvq vg, abg V. Qrfgval.

GUR ZBGURE: (N TERRA EVYY BS OVYR GEVPXYVAT SEBZ N FVQR BS URE ZBHGU) Lbh
fnat gung fbat gb zr. YBIR'F OVGGRE ZLFGREL.

FGRCURA: (RNTREYL) Gryy zr gur jbeq, zbgure, vs lbh xabj abj. Gur jbeq
xabja gb nyy zra.

GUR ZBGURE: Jub fnirq lbh gur avtug lbh whzcrq vagb gur genva ng Qnyxrl
jvgu Cnqql Yrr? Jub unq cvgl sbe lbh jura lbh jrer fnq nzbat gur
fgenatref? Cenlre vf nyycbjreshy. Cenlre sbe gur fhssrevat fbhyf va gur
Hefhyvar znahny naq sbegl qnlf' vaqhytrapr. Ercrag, Fgrcura.

FGRCURA: Gur tubhy! Ulran!

GUR ZBGURE: V cenl sbe lbh va zl bgure jbeyq. Trg Qvyyl gb znxr lbh gung
obvyrq evpr rirel avtug nsgre lbhe oenvajbex. Lrnef naq lrnef V ybirq
lbh, B, zl fba, zl svefgobea, jura lbh ynl va zl jbzo.

MBR: (SNAAVAT UREFRYS JVGU GUR TENGR SNA) V'z zrygvat!

SYBEEL: (CBVAGF GB FGRCURA) Ybbx! Ur'f juvgr.

OYBBZ: (TBRF GB GUR JVAQBJ GB BCRA VG ZBER) Tvqql.

GUR ZBGURE: (JVGU FZBHYQREVAT RLRF) Ercrag! B, gur sver bs uryy!

FGRCURA: (CNAGVAT) Uvf abapbeebfvir fhoyvzngr! Gur pbecfrpurjre! Enj urnq
naq oybbql obarf.

GUR ZBGURE: (URE SNPR QENJVAT ARNE NAQ ARNERE, FRAQVAT BHG NA NFURA
OERNGU) Orjner! (FUR ENVFRF URE OYNPXRARQ JVGURERQ EVTUG NEZ FYBJYL
GBJNEQF FGRCURA'F OERNFG JVGU BHGFGERGPURQ SVATRE) Orjner Tbq'f unaq! (N
TERRA PENO JVGU ZNYVTANAG ERQ RLRF FGVPXF QRRC VGF TEVAAVAT PYNJF VA
FGRCURA'F URNEG.)

FGRCURA: (FGENATYRQ JVGU ENTR) Fuvgr! (UVF SRNGHERF TEBJ QENJA TERL NAQ
BYQ)

OYBBZ: (NG GUR JVAQBJ) Jung?

FGRCURA: NU ABA, CNE RKRZCYR! Gur vagryyrpghny vzntvangvba! Jvgu zr nyy
be abg ng nyy. ABA FREIVNZ!

SYBEEL: Tvir uvz fbzr pbyq jngre. Jnvg. (FUR EHFURF BHG)

GUR ZBGURE: (JEVATF URE UNAQF FYBJYL, ZBNAVAT QRFCRENGRYL) B Fnperq Urneg
bs Wrfhf, unir zrepl ba uvz! Fnir uvz sebz uryy, B Qvivar Fnperq Urneg!

FGRCURA: Ab! Ab! Ab! Oernx zl fcvevg, nyy bs lbh, vs lbh pna! V'yy oevat
lbh nyy gb urry!

GUR ZBGURE: (VA GUR NTBAL BS URE QRNGUENGGYR) Unir zrepl ba Fgrcura,
Ybeq, sbe zl fnxr! Varkcerffvoyr jnf zl nathvfu jura rkcvevat jvgu ybir,
tevrs naq ntbal ba Zbhag Pnyinel.

FGRCURA: ABGUHAT!

(UR YVSGF UVF NFUCYNAG UVTU JVGU OBGU UNAQF NAQ FZNFURF GUR PUNAQRYVRE.
GVZR'F YVIVQ SVANY SYNZR YRNCF NAQ, VA GUR SBYYBJVAT QNEXARFF, EHVA BS
NYY FCNPR, FUNGGRERQ TYNFF NAQ GBCCYVAT ZNFBAEL.)

GUR TNFWRG: Cjshatt!

OYBBZ: Fgbc!

YLAPU: (EHFURF SBEJNEQ NAQ FRVMRF FGRCURA'F UNAQ) Urer! Ubyq ba! Qba'g
eha nzbx!

ORYYN: Cbyvpr!

(FGRCURA, NONAQBAVAT UVF NFUCYNAG, UVF URNQ NAQ NEZF GUEBJA ONPX FGNEX,
ORNGF GUR TEBHAQ NAQ SYVRF SEBZ GUR EBBZ, CNFG GUR JUBERF NG GUR QBBE.)

ORYYN: (FPERNZF) Nsgre uvz!

(GUR GJB JUBERF EHFU GB GUR UNYYQBBE. YLAPU NAQ XVGGL NAQ MBR FGNZCRQR
SEBZ GUR EBBZ. GURL GNYX RKPVGRQYL. OYBBZ SBYYBJF, ERGHEAF.)

GUR JUBERF: (WNZZRQ VA GUR QBBEJNL, CBVAGVAT) Qbja gurer.

MBR: (CBVAGVAT) Gurer. Gurer'f fbzrguvat hc.

ORYYN: Jub cnlf sbe gur ynzc? (FUR FRVMRF OYBBZ'F PBNGGNVY) Urer, lbh
jrer jvgu uvz. Gur ynzc'f oebxra.

OYBBZ: (EHFURF GB GUR UNYY, EHFURF ONPX) Jung ynzc, jbzna?

N JUBER: Ur gber uvf pbng.

ORYYN: (URE RLRF UNEQ JVGU NATRE NAQ PHCVQVGL, CBVAGF) Jub'f gb cnl sbe
gung? Gra fuvyyvatf. Lbh'er n jvgarff.

OYBBZ: (FANGPURF HC FGRCURA'F NFUCYNAG) Zr? Gra fuvyyvatf? Unira'g lbh
yvsgrq rabhtu bss uvz? Qvqa'g ur ...?

ORYYN: (YBHQYL) Urer, abar bs lbhe gnyy gnyx. Guvf vfa'g n oebgury. N gra
fuvyyvat ubhfr.

OYBBZ: (UVF URNQ HAQRE GUR YNZC, CHYYF GUR PUNVA. CHYVAT, GUR TNFWRG
YVTUGF HC N PEHFURQ ZNHIR CHECYR FUNQR. UR ENVFRF GUR NFUCYNAG.) Bayl gur
puvzarl'f oebxra. Urer vf nyy ur ...

ORYYN: (FUEVAXF ONPX NAQ FPERNZF) Wrfhf! Qba'g!

OYBBZ: (JNEQVAT BSS N OYBJ) Gb fubj lbh ubj ur uvg gur cncre. Gurer'f abg
fvkcraprjbegu bs qnzntr qbar. Gra fuvyyvatf!

SYBEEL: (JVGU N TYNFF BS JNGRE, RAGREF) Jurer vf ur?

ORYYN: Qb lbh jnag zr gb pnyy gur cbyvpr?

OYBBZ: B, V xabj. Ohyyqbt ba gur cerzvfrf. Ohg ur'f n Gevavgl fghqrag.
Cngebaf bs lbhe rfgnoyvfuzrag. Tragyrzra gung cnl gur erag. (UR ZNXRF N
ZNFBAVP FVTA) Xabj jung V zrna? Arcurj bs gur ivpr-punapryybe. Lbh qba'g
jnag n fpnaqny.

ORYYN: (NATEVYL) Gevavgl. Pbzvat qbja urer enttvat nsgre gur obngenprf
naq cnlvat abguvat. Ner lbh zl pbzznaqre urer be? Jurer vf ur? V'yy
punetr uvz! Qvftenpr uvz, V jvyy! (FUR FUBHGF) Mbr! Mbr!

OYBBZ: (HETRAGYL) Naq vs vg jrer lbhe bja fba va Bksbeq? (JNEAVATYL) V
xabj.

ORYYN: (NYZBFG FCRRPUYRFF) Jub ner. Vapbt!

MBR: (VA GUR QBBEJNL) Gurer'f n ebj ba.

OYBBZ: Jung? Jurer? (UR GUEBJF N FUVYYVAT BA GUR GNOYR NAQ FGNEGF) Gung'f
sbe gur puvzarl. Jurer? V arrq zbhagnva nve.

(UR UHEEVRF BHG GUEBHTU GUR UNYY. GUR JUBERF CBVAG. SYBEEL SBYYBJF,
FCVYYVAT JNGRE SEBZ URE GVYGRQ GHZOYRE. BA GUR QBBEFGRC NYY GUR JUBERF
PYHFGRERQ GNYX IBYHOYL, CBVAGVAT GB GUR EVTUG JURER GUR SBT UNF PYRNERQ
BSS. SEBZ GUR YRSG NEEVIRF N WVATYVAT UNPXARL PNE. VG FYBJF GB VA SEBAG
BS GUR UBHFR. OYBBZ NG GUR UNYYQBBE CREPRVIRF PBEAL XRYYRURE JUB VF NOBHG
GB QVFZBHAG SEBZ GUR PNE JVGU GJB FVYRAG YRPUREF. UR NIREGF UVF SNPR.
ORYYN SEBZ JVGUVA GUR UNYY HETRF BA URE JUBERF. GURL OYBJ VPXLYVPXLFGVPXL
LHZLHZ XVFFRF. PBEAL XRYYRURE ERCYVRF JVGU N TUNFGYL YRJQ FZVYR. GUR
FVYRAG YRPUREF GHEA GB CNL GUR WNEIRL. MBR NAQ XVGGL FGVYY CBVAG EVTUG.
OYBBZ, CNEGVAT GURZ FJVSGYL, QENJF UVF PNYVCU'F UBBQ NAQ CBAPUB NAQ
UHEEVRF QBJA GUR FGRCF JVGU FVQRJNLF SNPR. VAPBT UNEBHA NY ENFPUVQ UR
SYVGF ORUVAQ GUR FVYRAG YRPUREF NAQ UNFGRAF BA OL GUR ENVYVATF JVGU SYRRG
FGRC BS N CNEQ FGERJVAT GUR QENT ORUVAQ UVZ, GBEA RAIRYBCRF QERAPURQ VA
NAVFRRQ. GUR NFUCYNAG ZNEXF UVF FGEVQR. N CNPX BS OYBBQUBHAQF, YRQ OL
UBEAOYBJRE BS GEVAVGL OENAQVFUVAT N QBTJUVC VA GNYYLUB PNC NAQ NA BYQ
CNVE BS TERL GEBHFREF, SBYYBJ SEBZ SVE, CVPXVAT HC GUR FPRAG, ARNERE,
ONLVAT, CNAGVAT, NG SNHYG, OERNXVAT NJNL, GUEBJVAT GURVE GBATHRF, OVGVAT
UVF URRYF, YRNCVAT NG UVF GNVY. UR JNYXF, EHAF, MVTMNTF, TNYYBCF, YHTF
YNVQ ONPX. UR VF CRYGRQ JVGU TENIRY, PNOONTRFGHZCF, OVFPHVGOBKRF, RTTF,
CBGNGBRF, QRNQ PBQSVFU, JBZNA'F FYVCCREFYNCCREF. NSGRE UVZ SERFUSBHAQ GUR
UHR NAQ PEL MVTMNT TNYYBCF VA UBG CHEFHVG BS SBYYBJ ZL YRNQRE: 65 P, 66
P, AVTUG JNGPU, WBUA URAEL ZRAGBA, JVFQBZ URYL, I. O. QVYYBA, PBHAPVYYBE
ANAARGGV, NYRKNAQRE XRLRF, YNEEL B'EBHEXR, WBR PHSSR ZEF B'QBJQ, CVFFRE
OHEXR, GUR ANZRYRFF BAR, ZEF EVBEQNA, GUR PVGVMRA, TNEELBJRA,
JUBQBLBHPNYYUVZ, FGENATRSNPR, SRYYBJGUNGFBYVXR, FNJUVZORSBER,
PUNCJVGUNJRA, PUEVF PNYYVANA, FVE PUNEYRF PNZREBA, ORAWNZVA QBYYNEQ,
YRARUNA, ONEGRYY Q'NEPL, WBR ULARF, ERQ ZHEENL, RQVGBE OENLQRA, G. Z.
URNYL, ZE WHFGVPR SVGMTVOOBA, WBUA UBJNEQ CNEARYY, GUR ERIRERAQ GVAARQ
FNYZBA, CEBSRFFBE WBYL, ZEF OERRA, QRAVF OERRA, GURBQBER CHERSBL, ZVAN
CHERSBL, GUR JRFGYNAQ EBJ CBFGZVFGERFF, P. C. Z'PBL, SEVRAQ BS YLBAF,
UBCCL UBYBUNA, ZNAVAGURFGERRG, BGUREZNAVAGURFGERRG, SBBGONYYOBBGF,
CHTABFRQ QEVIRE, EVPU CEBGRFGNAG YNQL, QNIL OLEAR, ZEF RYYRA Z'THVAARFF,
ZEF WBR TNYYNURE, TRBETR YVQJRYY, WVZZL URAEL BA PBEAF, FHCREVAGRAQRAG
YNENPL, SNGURE PBJYRL, PEBSGBA BHG BS GUR PBYYRPGBE-TRARENY'F, QNA
QNJFBA, QRAGNY FHETRBA OYBBZ JVGU GJRRMREF, ZEF OBO QBENA, ZEF XRAARSVPX,
ZEF JLFR ABYNA, WBUA JLFR ABYNA,
UNAQFBZRZNEEVRQJBZNAEHOORQNTNVAFGJVQRORUVAQVAPYBAFXRNGENZ, GUR OBBXFRYYRE
BS Fjrrgf Bs Fva, ZVFF QHORQNGNAQFURQVQORQNQ, ZRFQNZRF TRENYQ NAQ
FGNAVFYNHF ZBENA BS EBROHPX, GUR ZNANTVAT PYREX BS QEVZZVR'F, JRGUREHC,
PBYBARY UNLRF, ZNFGVNAFXL, PVGEBA, CRAEBFR, NNEBA SVTNGARE, ZBFRF UREMBT,
ZVPUNRY R TRENTUGL, VAFCRPGBE GEBL, ZEF TNYOENVGU, GUR PBAFGNOYR BSS
RPPYRF FGERRG PBEARE, BYQ QBPGBE OENQL JVGU FGRGUBFPBCR, GUR ZLFGREL ZNA
BA GUR ORNPU, N ERGEVRIRE, ZEF ZVEVNZ QNAQENQR NAQ NYY URE YBIREF.)

GUR UHR NAQ PEL: (URYGREFXRYGRECRYGREJRYGRE) Ur'f Oybbz! Fgbc Oybbz!
Fgbcnoybbz! Fgbccreeboore! Uv! Uv! Fgbcuvz ba gur pbeare!

(NG GUR PBEARE BS ORNIRE FGERRG ORARNGU GUR FPNSSBYQVAT OYBBZ CNAGVAT
FGBCF BA GUR SEVATR BS GUR ABVFL DHNEERYYVAT XABG, N YBG ABG XABJVAT N
WBG JUNG UV! UV! EBJ NAQ JENATYR EBHAQ GUR JUBJUNG OENJYNYGBTRGURE.)

FGRCURA: (JVGU RYNOBENGR TRFGHERF, OERNGUVAT QRRCYL NAQ FYBJYL) Lbh ner
zl thrfgf. Havaivgrq. Ol iveghr bs gur svsgu bs Trbetr naq friragu bs
Rqjneq. Uvfgbel gb oynzr. Snoyrq ol zbguref bs zrzbel.

CEVINGR PNEE: (GB PVFFL PNSSERL) Jnf ur vafhygvat lbh?

FGRCURA: Nqqerffrq ure va ibpngvir srzvavar. Cebonoyl arhgre. Hatravgvir.

IBVPRF: Ab, ur qvqa'g. V frra uvz. Gur tvey gurer. Ur jnf va Zef Pbura'f.
Jung'f hc? Fbyqvre naq pvivyvna.

PVFFL PNSSERL: V jnf va pbzcnal jvgu gur fbyqvref naq gurl yrsg zr gb
qb--lbh xabj, naq gur lbhat zna eha hc oruvaq zr. Ohg V'z snvgushy gb gur
zna gung'f gerngvat zr gubhtu V'z bayl n fuvyyvat juber.

FGRCURA: (PNGPURF FVTUG BS YLAPU'F NAQ XVGGL'F URNQF) Unvy, Fvflcuhf. (UR
CBVAGF GB UVZFRYS NAQ GUR BGUREF) Cbrgvp. Hebcbrgvp.

IBVPRF: Furf snvgushygurzna.

PVFFL PNSSERL: Lrf, gb tb jvgu uvz. Naq zr jvgu n fbyqvre sevraq.

CEVINGR PBZCGBA: Ur qbrfa'g unys jnag n guvpx rne, gur oyvtugre. Ovss uvz
bar, Uneel.

CEVINGR PNEE: (GB PVFFL) Jnf ur vafhygvat lbh juvyr zr naq uvz jnf univat
n cvff?

YBEQ GRAALFBA: (TRAGYRZNA CBRG VA HAVBA WNPX OYNMRE NAQ PEVPXRG SYNAARYF,
ONERURNQRQ, SYBJVATORNEQRQ) Gurvef abg gb ernfba jul.

CEVINGR PBZCGBA: Ovss uvz, Uneel.

FGRCURA: (GB CEVINGR PBZCGBA) V qba'g xabj lbhe anzr ohg lbh ner dhvgr
evtug. Qbpgbe Fjvsg fnlf bar zna va nezbhe jvyy orng gra zra va gurve
fuvegf. Fuveg vf flarpuqbpur. Cneg sbe gur jubyr.

PVFFL PNSSERL: (GB GUR PEBJQ) Ab, V jnf jvgu gur cevingrf.

FGRCURA: (NZVNOYL) Jul abg? Gur obyq fbyqvre obl. Va zl bcvavba rirel
ynql sbe rknzcyr ...

CEVINGR PNEE: (UVF PNC NJEL, NQINAPRF GB FGRCURA) Fnl, ubj jbhyq vg or,
tbireabe, vs V jnf gb onfu va lbhe wnj?

FGRCURA: (YBBXF HC GB GUR FXL) Ubj? Irel hacyrnfnag. Aboyr neg bs
fryscergrapr. Crefbanyyl, V qrgrfg npgvba. (UR JNIRF UVF UNAQ) Unaq uhegf
zr fyvtugyl. RASVA PR FBAG IBF BVTABAF. (GB PVFFL PNSSERL) Fbzr gebhoyr
vf ba urer. Jung vf vg cerpvfryl?

QBYYL TENL: (SEBZ URE ONYPBAL JNIRF URE UNAQXREPUVRS, TVIVAT GUR FVTA BS
GUR UREBVAR BS WREVPUB) Enuno. Pbbx'f fba, tbbqolr. Fnsr ubzr gb Qbyyl.
Qernz bs gur tvey lbh yrsg oruvaq naq fur jvyy qernz bs lbh.

(GUR FBYQVREF GHEA GURVE FJVZZVAT RLRF.)

OYBBZ: (RYOBJVAT GUEBHTU GUR PEBJQ, CYHPXF FGRCURA'F FYRRIR IVTBEBHFYL)
Pbzr abj, cebsrffbe, gung pnezna vf jnvgvat.

FGRCURA: (GHEAF) Ru? (UR QVFRATNTRF UVZFRYS) Jul fubhyq V abg fcrnx gb
uvz be gb nal uhzna orvat jub jnyxf hcevtug hcba guvf boyngr benatr? (UR
CBVAGF UVF SVATRE) V'z abg nsenvq bs jung V pna gnyx gb vs V frr uvf rlr.
Ergnvavat gur crecraqvphyne.

(UR FGNTTREF N CNPR ONPX)

OYBBZ: (CEBCCVAT UVZ) Ergnva lbhe bja.

FGRCURA: (YNHTUF RZCGVYL) Zl prager bs tenivgl vf qvfcynprq. V unir
sbetbggra gur gevpx. Yrg hf fvg qbja fbzrjurer naq qvfphff. Fgehttyr sbe
yvsr vf gur ynj bs rkvfgrapr ohg ohg uhzna cuvyveravfgf, abgnoyl gur gfne
naq gur xvat bs Ratynaq, unir vairagrq neovgengvba. (UR GNCF UVF OEBJ)
Ohg va urer vg vf V zhfg xvyy gur cevrfg naq gur xvat.

OVQQL GUR PYNC: Qvq lbh urne jung gur cebsrffbe fnvq? Ur'f n cebsrffbe
bhg bs gur pbyyrtr.

PHAGL XNGR: V qvq. V urneq gung.

OVQQL GUR PYNC: Ur rkcerffrf uvzfrys jvgu fhpu znexrq ersvarzrag bs
cuenfrbybtl.

PHAGL XNGR: Vaqrrq, lrf. Naq ng gur fnzr gvzr jvgu fhpu nccbfvgr
gerapunapl.

CEVINGR PNEE: (CHYYF UVZFRYS SERR NAQ PBZRF SBEJNEQ) Jung'f gung lbh'er
fnlvat nobhg zl xvat?

(RQJNEQ GUR FRIRAGU NCCRNEF VA NA NEPUJNL. UR JNEF N JUVGR WREFRL BA
JUVPU NA VZNTR BS GUR FNPERQ URNEG VF FGVGPURQ JVGU GUR VAFVTAVN BS
TNEGRE NAQ GUVFGYR, TBYQRA SYRRPR, RYRCUNAG BS QRAZNEX, FXVAARE'F NAQ
CEBOLA'F UBEFR, YVAPBYA'F VAA ORAPURE NAQ NAPVRAG NAQ UBABHENOYR
NEGVYYREL PBZCNAL BS ZNFFNPUHFRGGF. UR FHPXF N ERQ WHWHOR. UR VF EBORQ NF
N TENAQ RYRPG CRESRPG NAQ FHOYVZR ZNFBA JVGU GEBJRY NAQ NCEBA, ZNEXRQ
znqr va Treznal. VA UVF YRSG UNAQ UR UBYQF N CYNFGRERE'F OHPXRG BA JUVPU
VF CEVAGRQ Qrsrafr q'hevare. N EBNE BS JRYPBZR TERRGF UVZ.)

RQJNEQ GUR FRIRAGU: (FYBJYL, FBYRZAYL OHG VAQVFGVAPGYL) Crnpr, cresrpg
crnpr. Sbe vqragvsvpngvba, ohpxrg va zl unaq. Purrevb, oblf. (UR GHEAF GB
UVF FHOWRPGF) Jr unir pbzr urer gb jvgarff n pyrna fgenvtug svtug naq jr
urnegvyl jvfu obgu zra gur orfg bs tbbq yhpx. Znunx znxne n onx.

(UR FUNXRF UNAQF JVGU CEVINGR PNEE, CEVINGR PBZCGBA, FGRCURA, OYBBZ NAQ
YLAPU. TRARENY NCCYNHFR. RQJNEQ GUR FRIRAGU YVSGF UVF OHPXRG TENPVBHFYL
VA NPXABJYRQTZRAG.)

CEVINGR PNEE: (GB FGRCURA) Fnl vg ntnva.

FGRCURA: (AREIBHF, SEVRAQYL, CHYYF UVZFRYS HC) V haqrefgnaq lbhe cbvag bs
ivrj gubhtu V unir ab xvat zlfrys sbe gur zbzrag. Guvf vf gur ntr bs
cngrag zrqvpvarf. N qvfphffvba vf qvssvphyg qbja urer. Ohg guvf vf gur
cbvag. Lbh qvr sbe lbhe pbhagel. Fhccbfr. (UR CYNPRF UVF NEZ BA CEVINGR
PNEE'F FYRRIR)  Abg gung V jvfu vg sbe lbh. Ohg V fnl: Yrg zl pbhagel qvr
sbe zr. Hc gb gur  cerfrag vg unf qbar fb. V qvqa'g jnag vg gb qvr. Qnza
qrngu. Ybat yvir yvsr!

RQJNEQ GUR FRIRAGU: (YRIVGNGRF BIRE URNCF BS FYNVA, VA GUR TNEO NAQ JVGU
GUR UNYB BS WBXVAT WRFHF, N JUVGR WHWHOR VA UVF CUBFCUBERFPRAG SNPR)


    Zl zrgubqf ner arj naq ner pnhfvat fhecevfr.
    Gb znxr gur oyvaq frr V guebj qhfg va gurve rlrf.


FGRCURA: Xvatf naq havpbeaf! (UR SVYYF ONPX N CNPR) Pbzr fbzrjurer naq
jr'yy ... Jung jnf gung tvey fnlvat? ...

CEVINGR PBZCGBA: Ru, Uneel, tvir uvz n xvpx va gur xanpxref. Fgvpx bar
vagb Wreel.

OYBBZ: (GB GUR CEVINGRF, FBSGYL) Ur qbrfa'g xabj jung ur'f fnlvat. Gnxra
n yvggyr zber guna vf tbbq sbe uvz. Nofvagur. Terrarlrq zbafgre. V xabj
uvz. Ur'f n tragyrzna, n cbrg. Vg'f nyy evtug.

FGRCURA: (ABQF, FZVYVAT NAQ YNHTUVAT) Tragyrzna, cngevbg, fpubyne naq
whqtr bs vzcbfgbef.

CEVINGR PNEE: V qba'g tvir n ohttre jub ur vf.

CEVINGR PBZCGBA: Jr qba'g tvir n ohttre jub ur vf.

FGRCURA: V frrz gb naabl gurz. Terra ent gb n ohyy.

(XRIVA RTNA BS CNEVF VA OYNPX FCNAVFU GNFFRYYRQ FUVEG NAQ CRRC-B'-QNL
OBL'F UNG FVTAF GB FGRCURA.)

XRIVA RTNA: U'yb! OBAWBHE! Gur IVRVYYR BTERFFR jvgu gur QRAGF WNHARF.

(CNGEVPR RTNA CRRCF SEBZ ORUVAQ, UVF ENOOVGSNPR AVOOYVAT N DHVAPR YRNS.)

CNGEVPR: FBPVNYVFGR!

QBA RZVYR CNGEVMVB SENAM EHCREG CBCR URAARFFL: (VA ZRQVRINY UNHOREX, GJB
JVYQ TRRFR IBYNAG BA UVF URYZ, JVGU ABOYR VAQVTANGVBA CBVAGF N ZNVYRQ
UNAQ NTNVAFG GUR CEVINGRF) Jres gubfr rlxrf gb sbbgobqra, ovt tenaq
cbepbf bs wbualryybjf gbqbf pbirerq bs tenil!

OYBBZ: (GB FGRCURA) Pbzr ubzr. Lbh'yy trg vagb gebhoyr.

FGRCURA: (FJNLVAT) V qba'g nibvq vg. Ur cebibxrf zl vagryyvtrapr.

OVQQL GUR PYNC: Bar vzzrqvngryl bofreirf gung ur vf bs cngevpvna yvarntr.

GUR IVENTB: Terra nobir gur erq, fnlf ur. Jbysr Gbar.

GUR ONJQ: Gur erq'f nf tbbq nf gur terra. Naq orggre. Hc gur fbyqvref! Hc
Xvat Rqjneq!

N EBHTU: (YNHTUF) Nl! Unaqf hc gb Qr Jrg.

GUR PVGVMRA: (JVGU N UHTR RZRENYQ ZHSSYRE NAQ FUVYYRYNTU, PNYYF)


    Znl gur Tbq nobir
    Fraq qbja n qbir
    Jvgu grrgu nf funec nf enmbef
    Gb fyvg gur guebngf
    Bs gur Ratyvfu qbtf
    Gung unatrq bhe Vevfu yrnqref.


GUR PEBCCL OBL: (GUR EBCRABBFR EBHAQ UVF ARPX, TEVCRF VA UVF VFFHVAT
OBJRYF JVGU OBGU UNAQF)


    V orne ab ungr gb n yvivat guvat,
    Ohg V ybir zl pbhagel orlbaq gur xvat.


EHZOBYQ, QRZBA ONEORE: (NPPBZCNAVRQ OL GJB OYNPXZNFXRQ NFFVFGNAGF,
NQINAPRF JVGU TYNQFGBAR ONT JUVPU UR BCRAF) Ynqvrf naq tragf, pyrnire
chepunfrq ol Zef Crnepl gb fynl Zbtt. Xavsr jvgu juvpu Ibvfva qvfzrzorerq
gur jvsr bs n pbzcngevbg naq uvq erznvaf va n furrg va gur pryyne, gur
hasbeghangr srznyr'f guebng orvat phg sebz rne gb rne. Cuvny pbagnvavat
nefravp ergevrirq sebz obql bs Zvff Oneeba juvpu frag Frqqba gb gur
tnyybjf.

(UR WREXF GUR EBCR. GUR NFFVFGNAGF YRNC NG GUR IVPGVZ'F YRTF NAQ QENT UVZ
QBJAJNEQ, TEHAGVAT GUR PEBCCL OBL'F GBATHR CEBGEHQRF IVBYRAGYL.)

GUR PEBCCL OBL:


    Ubeubg ub uenl ube ubgure'f urfg.


(UR TVIRF HC GUR TUBFG. N IVBYRAG RERPGVBA BS GUR UNATRQ FRAQF TBHGF BS
FCREZ FCBHGVAT GUEBHTU UVF QRNGUPYBGURF BA GB GUR PBOOYRFGBARF. ZEF
ORYYVATUNZ, ZEF LRYIREGBA ONEEL NAQ GUR UBABHENOYR ZEF ZREILA GNYOBLF
EHFU SBEJNEQ JVGU GURVE UNAQXREPUVRSF GB FBC VG HC.)

EHZOBYQ: V'z arne vg zlfrys. (UR HAQBRF GUR ABBFR) Ebcr juvpu unatrq gur
njshy erory. Gra fuvyyvatf n gvzr. Nf nccyvrq gb Ure Eblny Uvtuarff. (UR
CYHATRF UVF URNQ VAGB GUR TNCVAT ORYYL BS GUR UNATRQ NAQ QENJF BHG UVF
URNQ NTNVA PYBGGRQ JVGU PBVYRQ NAQ FZBXVAT RAGENVYF) Zl cnvashy qhgl unf
abj orra qbar. Tbq fnir gur xvat!

RQJNEQ GUR FRIRAGU: (QNAPRF FYBJYL, FBYRZAYL, ENGGYVAT UVF OHPXRG, NAQ
FVATF JVGU FBSG PBAGRAGZRAG)


    Ba pbebangvba qnl, ba pbebangvba qnl,
    B, jba'g jr unir n zreel gvzr,
    Qevaxvat juvfxl, orre naq jvar!


CEVINGR PNEE: Urer. Jung ner lbh fnlvat nobhg zl xvat?

FGRCURA: (GUEBJF HC UVF UNAQF) B, guvf vf gbb zbabgbabhf! Abguvat. Ur
jnagf zl zbarl naq zl yvsr, gubhtu jnag zhfg or uvf znfgre, sbe fbzr
oehgvfu rzcver bs uvf. Zbarl V unira'g. (UR FRNEPURF UVF CBPXRGF INTHRYL)
TNIR VG GB FBZRBAR.

CEVINGR PNEE: Jub jnagf lbhe oyrrqvat zbarl?

FGRCURA: (GEVRF GB ZBIR BSS) Jvyy fbzrbar gryy zr jurer V nz yrnfg yvxryl
gb zrrg gurfr arprffnel rivyf? PN FR IBVG NHFFV N CNEVF. Abg gung V ...
Ohg, ol Fnvag Cngevpx ...!

(GUR JBZRA'F URNQF PBNYRFPR. BYQ THZZL TENAAL VA FHTNEYBNS UNG NCCRNEF
FRNGRQ BA N GBNQFGBBY, GUR QRNGUSYBJRE BS GUR CBGNGB OYVTUG BA URE
OERNFG.)

FGRCURA: Nun! V xabj lbh, tnzzre! Unzyrg, eriratr! Gur byq fbj gung rngf
ure sneebj!

BYQ THZZL TENAAL: (EBPXVAT GB NAQ SEB) Verynaq'f fjrrgurneg, gur xvat bs
Fcnva'f qnhtugre, nynaan. Fgenatref va zl ubhfr, onq znaaref gb gurz!
(FUR XRRAF JVGU ONAFURR JBR) Bpubar! Bpubar! Fvyx bs gur xvar! (FUR
JNVYF) Lbh zrg jvgu cbbe byq Verynaq naq ubj qbrf fur fgnaq?

FGRCURA: Ubj qb V fgnaq lbh? Gur ung gevpx! Jurer'f gur guveq crefba bs
gur Oyrffrq Gevavgl? Fbttnegu Nebba? Gur erireraq Pneevba Pebj.

PVFFL PNSSERL: (FUEVYY) Fgbc gurz sebz svtugvat!

N EBHTU: Bhe zra ergerngrq.

CEVINGR PNEE: (GHTTVAT NG UVF ORYG) V'yy jevat gur arpx bs nal shpxre
fnlf n jbeq ntnvafg zl shpxvat xvat.

OYBBZ: (GREEVSVRQ) Ur fnvq abguvat. Abg n jbeq. N cher zvfhaqrefgnaqvat.

GUR PVGVMRA: REVA TB OENTU!

(ZNWBE GJRRQL NAQ GUR PVGVMRA RKUVOVG GB RNPU BGURE ZRQNYF, QRPBENGVBAF,
GEBCUVRF BS JNE, JBHAQF. OBGU FNYHGR JVGU SVREPR UBFGVYVGL.)

CEVINGR PBZCGBA: Tb vg, Uneel. Qb uvz bar va gur rlr. Ur'f n cebobre.

FGRCURA: Qvq V? Jura?

OYBBZ: (GB GUR ERQPBNGF) Jr sbhtug sbe lbh va Fbhgu Nsevpn, Vevfu zvffvyr
gebbcf. Vfa'g gung uvfgbel? Eblny Qhoyva Shfvyvref. Ubabherq ol bhe
zbanepu.

GUR ANIIL: (FGNTTREVAT CNFG) B, lrf! B Tbq, lrf! B, znxr gur xjnje n
xebjnje! B! Ob!

(PNFDHRQ UNYOREQVREF VA NEZBHE GUEHFG SBEJNEQ N CRAGVPR BS THGGRQ
FCRNECBVAGF. ZNWBE GJRRQL, ZBHFGNPURQ YVXR GHEXB GUR GREEVOYR, VA
ORNEFXVA PNC JVGU UNPXYRCYHZR NAQ NPPBHGERZRAGF, JVGU RCNHYRGGRF, TVYG
PURIEBAF NAQ FNOERGNPURF, UVF OERNFG OEVTUG JVGU ZRQNYF, GBRF GUR YVAR.
UR TVIRF GUR CVYTEVZ JNEEVBE'F FVTA BS GUR XAVTUGF GRZCYNEF.)

ZNWBE GJRRQL: (TEBJYF TEHSSYL) Ebexr'f Qevsg! Hc, thneqf, naq ng gurz!
Znune funyny unfuonm.

CEVINGR PNEE: V'yy qb uvz va.

CEVINGR PBZCGBA: (JNIRF GUR PEBJQ ONPX) Snve cynl, urer. Znxr n oyrrqvat
ohgpure'f fubc bs gur ohttre.

(ZNFFRQ ONAQF OYNER Tneelbjra NAQ Tbq fnir gur xvat.)

PVFFL PNSSERL: Gurl'er tbvat gb svtug. Sbe zr!

PHAGL XNGR: Gur oenir naq gur snve.

OVQQL GUR PYNC: Zrguvaxf lba fnoyr xavtug jvyy wbhfg vg jvgu gur orfg.

PHAGL XNGR: (OYHFUVAT QRRCYL) Anl, znqnz. Gur thyrf qbhoyrg naq zreel
fnvag Trbetr sbe zr!

FGRCURA:


    Gur uneybg'f pel sebz fgerrg gb fgerrg
    Funyy jrnir Byq Verynaq'f jvaqvatfurrg.


CEVINGR PNEE: (YBBFRAVAT UVF ORYG, FUBHGF) V'yy jevat gur arpx bs nal
shpxvat onfgneq fnlf n jbeq ntnvafg zl oyrrqvat shpxvat xvat.

OYBBZ: (FUNXRF PVFFL PNSSERL'F FUBHYQREF) Fcrnx, lbh! Ner lbh fgehpx
qhzo? Lbh ner gur yvax orgjrra angvbaf naq trarengvbaf. Fcrnx, jbzna,
fnperq yvsrtvire!

PVFFL PNSSERL: (NYNEZRQ, FRVMRF CEVINGR PNEE'F FYRRIR) Nza'g V jvgu lbh?
Nza'g V lbhe tvey? Pvffl'f lbhe tvey. (FUR PEVRF) Cbyvpr!

FGRCURA: (RPFGNGVPNYYL, GB PVFFL PNSSERL)


    Juvgr gul snzoyrf, erq gul tna
    Naq gul dhneebaf qnvagl vf.


IBVPRF: Cbyvpr!

QVFGNAG IBVPRF: Qhoyva'f oheavat! Qhoyva'f oheavat! Ba sver, ba sver!

(OEVZFGBAR SVERF FCEVAT HC. QRAFR PYBHQF EBYY CNFG. URNIL TNGYVAT THAF
OBBZ. CNAQRZBAVHZ. GEBBCF QRCYBL. TNYYBC BS UBBSF. NEGVYYREL. UBNEFR
PBZZNAQF. ORYYF PYNAT. ONPXREF FUBHG. QEHAXNEQF ONJY. JUBERF FPERRPU.
SBTUBEAF UBBG. PEVRF BS INYBHE. FUEVRXF BS QLVAT. CVXRF PYNFU BA
PHVENFFRF. GUVRIRF EBO GUR FYNVA. OVEQF BS CERL, JVATVAT SEBZ GUR FRN,
EVFVAT SEBZ ZNEFUYNAQF, FJBBCVAT SEBZ RLEVRF, UBIRE FPERNZVAT, TNAARGF,
PBEZBENAGF, IHYGHERF, TBFUNJXF, PYVZOVAT JBBQPBPXF, CRERTEVARF, ZREYVAF,
OYNPXTEBHFR, FRN RNTYRF, THYYF, NYONGEBFFRF, ONEANPYR TRRFR. GUR ZVQAVTUG
FHA VF QNEXRARQ. GUR RNEGU GERZOYRF. GUR QRNQ BS QHOYVA SEBZ CEBFCRPG NAQ
ZBHAG WREBZR VA JUVGR FURRCFXVA BIREPBNGF NAQ OYNPX TBNGSRYY PYBNXF NEVFR
NAQ NCCRNE GB ZNAL. N PUNFZ BCRAF JVGU N ABVFRYRFF LNJA. GBZ EBPUSBEQ,
JVAARE, VA NGUYRGR'F FVATYRG NAQ OERRPURF, NEEVIRF NG GUR URNQ BS GUR
ANGVBANY UHEQYR UNAQVPNC NAQ YRNCF VAGB GUR IBVQ. UR VF SBYYBJRQ OL N
ENPR BS EHAAREF NAQ YRNCREF. VA JVYQ NGGVGHQRF GURL FCEVAT SEBZ GUR
OEVAX. GURVE OBQVRF CYHATR. SNPGBEL YNFFRF JVGU SNAPL PYBGURF GBFF ERQUBG
LBEXFUVER ONENNOBZOF. FBPVRGL YNQVRF YVSG GURVE FXVEGF NOBIR GURVE URNQF
GB CEBGRPG GURZFRYIRF. YNHTUVAT JVGPURF VA ERQ PHGGL FNEXF EVQR GUEBHTU
GUR NVE BA OEBBZFGVPXF. DHNXREYLFGRE CYNFGREF OYVFGREF. VG ENVAF QENTBAF'
GRRGU. NEZRQ UREBRF FCEVAT HC SEBZ SHEEBJF. GURL RKPUNATR VA NZVGL GUR
CNFF BS XAVTUGF BS GUR ERQ PEBFF NAQ SVTUG QHRYF JVGU PNINYEL FNOERF:
JBYSR GBAR NTNVAFG URAEL TENGGNA, FZVGU B'OEVRA NTNVAFG QNAVRY B'PBAARYY,
ZVPUNRY QNIVGG NTNVAFG VFNNP OHGG, WHFGVA Z'PNEGUL NTNVAFG CNEARYY,
NEGUHE TEVSSVGU NTNVAFG WBUA ERQZBAQ, WBUA B'YRNEL NTNVAFG YRNE B'WBUAAL,
YBEQ RQJNEQ SVGMTRENYQ NTNVAFG YBEQ TRENYQ SVGMRQJNEQ, GUR B'QBABTUHR BS
GUR TYRAF NTNVAFG GUR TYRAF BS GUR B'QBABTUHR. BA NA RZVARAPR, GUR PRAGER
BS GUR RNEGU, EVFRF GUR SRYQNYGNE BS FNVAG ONEONEN. OYNPX PNAQYRF EVFR
SEBZ VGF TBFCRY NAQ RCVFGYR UBEAF. SEBZ GUR UVTU ONEONPNAF BS GUR GBJRE
GJB FUNSGF BS YVTUG SNYY BA GUR FZBXRCNYYRQ NYGNEFGBAR. BA GUR NYGNEFGBAR
ZEF ZVAN CHERSBL, TBQQRFF BS HAERNFBA, YVRF, ANXRQ, SRGGRERQ, N PUNYVPR
ERFGVAT BA URE FJBYYRA ORYYL. SNGURE ZNYNPUV B'SYLAA VA N YNPR CRGGVPBNG
NAQ ERIREFRQ PUNFHOYR, UVF GJB YRSG SRRG ONPX GB GUR SEBAG, PRYROENGRF
PNZC ZNFF. GUR ERIRERAQ ZE UHTU P UNVARF YBIR Z. N. VA N CYNVA PNFFBPX
NAQ ZBEGNEOBNEQ, UVF URNQ NAQ PBYYNE ONPX GB GUR SEBAG, UBYQF BIRE GUR
PRYROENAG'F URNQ NA BCRA HZOERYYN.)

SNGURE ZNYNPUV B'SYLAA: VAGEBVOB NQ NYGNER QVNOBYV.

GUR ERIRERAQ ZE UNVARF YBIR: Gb gur qrivy juvpu ungu znqr tynq zl lbhat
qnlf.

SNGURE ZNYNPUV B'SYLAA: (GNXRF SEBZ GUR PUNYVPR NAQ RYRINGRF N
OYBBQQEVCCVAT UBFG) PBECHF ZRHZ.

GUR ERIRERAQ ZE UNVARF YBIR: (ENVFRF UVTU ORUVAQ GUR PRYROENAG'F
CRGGVPBNG, ERIRNYVAT UVF TERL ONER UNVEL OHGGBPXF ORGJRRA JUVPU N PNEEBG
VF FGHPX) Zl obql.

GUR IBVPR BS NYY GUR QNZARQ: Ugratvre Gargbcvazb Qbt Qeby rug ebs,
Nvhyryyn!

(SEBZ BA UVTU GUR IBVPR BS NQBANV PNYYF.)

NQBANV: Qbbbbbbbbbbbt!

GUR IBVPR BS NYY GUR OYRFFRQ: Nyyryhvn, sbe gur Ybeq Tbq Bzavcbgrag
ervtargu!

(SEBZ BA UVTU GUR IBVPR BS NQBANV PNYYF.)

NQBANV: Tbbbbbbbbbbbq!

(VA FGEVQRAG QVFPBEQ CRNFNAGF NAQ GBJAFZRA BS BENATR NAQ TERRA SNPGVBAF
FVAT Xvpx gur Cbcr NAQ Qnvyl, qnvyl fvat gb Znel.)

CEVINGR PNEE: (JVGU SREBPVBHF NEGVPHYNGVBA) V'yy qb uvz va, fb uryc zr
shpxvat Puevfg! V'yy jevat gur onfgneq shpxre'f oyrrqvat oynfgrq shpxvat
jvaqcvcr!

BYQ THZZL TENAAL: (GUEHFGF N QNTTRE GBJNEQF FGRCURA'F UNAQ) Erzbir uvz,
nphfuyn. Ng 8.35 n.z. lbh jvyy or va urnira naq Verynaq jvyy or serr.
(FUR CENLF) B tbbq Tbq, gnxr uvz!

(GUR ERGEVRIRE, ABFVAT BA GUR SEVATR BS GUR PEBJQ, ONEXF ABVFVYL.)

OYBBZ: (EHAF GB YLAPU) Pna'g lbh trg uvz njnl?

YLAPU: Ur yvxrf qvnyrpgvp, gur havirefny ynathntr. Xvggl! (GB OYBBZ) Trg
uvz njnl, lbh. Ur jba'g yvfgra gb zr.

(UR QENTF XVGGL NJNL.)

FGRCURA: (CBVAGF) RKVG WHQNF. RG YNDHRB FR FHFCRAQVG.

OYBBZ: (EHAF GB FGRCURA) Pbzr nybat jvgu zr abj orsber jbefr unccraf.
Urer'f lbhe fgvpx.

FGRCURA: Fgvpx, ab. Ernfba. Guvf srnfg bs cher ernfba.

PVFFL PNSSERL: (CHYYVAT CEVINGR PNEE) Pbzr ba, lbh'er obbfrq. Ur vafhygrq
zr ohg V sbetvir uvz. (FUBHGVAT VA UVF RNE) V sbetvir uvz sbe vafhygvat
zr.

OYBBZ: (BIRE FGRCURA'F FUBHYQRE) Lrf, tb. Lbh frr ur'f vapncnoyr.

CEVINGR PNEE: (OERNXF YBBFR) V'yy vafhyg uvz.

(UR EHFURF GBJNEQF FGRCURA, SVFG BHGFGERGPURQ, NAQ FGEVXRF UVZ VA GUR
SNPR. FGRCURA GBGGREF, PBYYNCFRF, SNYYF, FGHAARQ. UR YVRF CEBAR, UVF SNPR
GB GUR FXL, UVF UNG EBYYVAT GB GUR JNYY. OYBBZ SBYYBJF NAQ CVPXF VG HC.)

ZNWBE GJRRQL: (YBHQYL) Pneovar va ohpxrg! Prnfr sver! Fnyhgr!

GUR ERGEVRIRE: (ONEXVAT SHEVBHFYL) Hgr hgr hgr hgr hgr hgr hgr hgr.

GUR PEBJQ: Yrg uvz hc! Qba'g fgevxr uvz jura ur'f qbja! Nve! Jub? Gur
fbyqvre uvg uvz. Ur'f n cebsrffbe. Vf ur uhegrq? Qba'g znaunaqyr uvz!
Ur'f snvagrq!

N UNT: Jung pnyy unq gur erqpbng gb fgevxr gur tragyrzna naq ur haqre gur
vasyhrapr. Yrg gurz tb naq svtug gur Obref!

GUR ONJQ: Yvfgra gb jub'f gnyxvat! Unfa'g gur fbyqvre n evtug gb tb jvgu
uvf tvey? Ur tnir uvz gur pbjneq'f oybj.

(GURL TENO NG RNPU BGURE'F UNVE, PYNJ NG RNPU BGURE NAQ FCVG)

GUR ERGEVRIRE: (ONEXVAT) Jbj jbj jbj.

OYBBZ: (FUBIRF GURZ ONPX, YBHQYL) Trg onpx, fgnaq onpx!

CEVINGR PBZCGBA: (GHTTVAT UVF PBZENQR) Urer. Ohttre bss, Uneel. Urer'f
gur pbcf!

(GJB ENVAPNCRQ JNGPU, GNYY, FGNAQ VA GUR TEBHC.)

SVEFG JNGPU: Jung'f jebat urer?

CEVINGR PBZCGBA: Jr jrer jvgu guvf ynql. Naq ur vafhygrq hf. Naq
nffnhygrq zl puhz. (GUR ERGEVRIRE ONEXF) Jub bjaf gur oyrrqvat glxr?

PVFFL PNSSERL: (JVGU RKCRPGNGVBA) Vf ur oyrrqvat!

N ZNA: (EVFVAT SEBZ UVF XARRF) Ab. Tbar bss. Ur'yy pbzr gb nyy evtug.

OYBBZ: (TYNAPRF FUNECYL NG GUR ZNA) Yrnir uvz gb zr. V pna rnfvyl ...

FRPBAQ JNGPU: Jub ner lbh? Qb lbh xabj uvz?

CEVINGR PNEE: (YHEPURF GBJNEQF GUR JNGPU) Ur vafhygrq zl ynql sevraq.

OYBBZ: (NATEVYL) Lbh uvg uvz jvgubhg cebibpngvba. V'z n jvgarff.
Pbafgnoyr, gnxr uvf ertvzragny ahzore.

FRPBAQ JNGPU: V qba'g jnag lbhe vafgehpgvbaf va gur qvfpunetr bs zl qhgl.

CEVINGR PBZCGBA: (CHYYVAT UVF PBZENQR) Urer, ohttre bss Uneel. Be
Oraargg'yy fubir lbh va gur ybpxhc.

CEVINGR PNEE: (FGNTTREVAT NF UR VF CHYYRQ NJNL) Tbq shpx byq Oraargg.
Ur'f n juvgrnefrq ohttre. V qba'g tvir n fuvg sbe uvz.

SVEFG JNGPU: (GNXRF BHG UVF ABGROBBX) Jung'f uvf anzr?

OYBBZ: (CRREVAT BIRE GUR PEBJQ) V whfg frr n pne gurer. Vs lbh tvir zr n
unaq n frpbaq, fretrnag ...

SVEFG JNGPU: Anzr naq nqqerff.

(PBEAL XRYYRXRE, JRRCREF EBHAQ UVF UNG, N QRNGU JERNGU VA UVF UNAQ,
NCCRNEF NZBAT GUR OLFGNAQREF.)

OYBBZ: (DHVPXYL) B, gur irel zna! (UR JUVFCREF) Fvzba Qrqnyhf' fba. N ovg
fcehat. Trg gubfr cbyvprzra gb zbir gubfr ybnsref onpx.

FRPBAQ JNGPU: Avtug, Ze Xryyrure.

PBEAL XRYYRURE: (GB GUR JNGPU, JVGU QENJYVAT RLR) Gung'f nyy evtug. V
xabj uvz. Jba n ovg ba gur enprf. Tbyq phc. Guebjnjnl. (UR YNHTUF) Gjragl
gb bar. Qb lbh sbyybj zr?

SVEFG JNGPU: (GHEAF GB GUR PEBJQ) Urer, jung ner lbh nyy tncvat ng? Zbir
ba bhg bs gung.

(GUR PEBJQ QVFCREFRF FYBJYL, ZHGGREVAT, QBJA GUR YNAR.)

PBEAL XRYYRURE: Yrnir vg gb zr, fretrnag. Gung'yy or nyy evtug. (UR
YNHTUF, FUNXVAT UVF URNQ) Jr jrer bsgra nf onq bhefryirf, nl be jbefr.
Jung? Ru, jung?

SVEFG JNGPU: (YNHTUF) V fhccbfr fb.

PBEAL XRYYRURE: (AHQTRF GUR FRPBAQ JNGPU) Pbzr naq jvcr lbhe anzr bss gur
fyngr. (UR YVYGF, JNTTVAT UVF URNQ) Jvgu zl gbbenybbz gbbenybbz gbbenybbz
gbbenybbz. Jung, ru, qb lbh sbyybj zr?

FRPBAQ JNGPU: (TRAVNYYL) Nu, fher jr jrer gbb.

PBEAL XRYYRURE: (JVAXVAT) Oblf jvyy or oblf. V'ir n pne ebhaq gurer.

FRPBAQ JNGPU: Nyy evtug, Ze Xryyrure. Tbbq avtug.

PBEAL XRYYRURE: V'yy frr gb gung.

OYBBZ: (FUNXRF UNAQF JVGU OBGU BS GUR JNGPU VA GHEA) Gunax lbh irel zhpu,
tragyrzra. Gunax lbh. (UR ZHZOYRF PBASVQRAGVNYYL) Jr qba'g jnag nal
fpnaqny, lbh haqrefgnaq. Sngure vf n jryyxabja uvtuyl erfcrpgrq pvgvmra.
Whfg n yvggyr jvyq bngf, lbh haqrefgnaq.

SVEFG JNGPU: B. V haqrefgnaq, fve.

FRPBAQ JNGPU: Gung'f nyy evtug, fve.

SVEFG JNGPU: Vg jnf bayl va pnfr bs pbecbeny vawhevrf V'q unir gb ercbeg
vg ng gur fgngvba.

OYBBZ: (ABQF ENCVQYL) Anghenyyl. Dhvgr evtug. Bayl lbhe obhaqra qhgl.

FRPBAQ JNGPU: Vg'f bhe qhgl.

PBEAL XRYYRURE: Tbbq avtug, zra.

GUR JNGPU: (FNYHGVAT GBTRGURE) Avtug, tragyrzra. (GURL ZBIR BSS JVGU FYBJ
URNIL GERNQ)

OYBBZ: (OYBJF) Cebivqragvny lbh pnzr ba gur fprar. Lbh unir n pne? ...

PBEAL XRYYRURE: (YNHTUF, CBVAGVAT UVF GUHZO BIRE UVF EVTUG FUBHYQRE GB
GUR PNE OEBHTUG HC NTNVAFG GUR FPNSSBYQVAT) Gjb pbzzrepvnyf gung jrer
fgnaqvat svmm va Wnzzrg'f. Yvxr cevaprf, snvgu. Bar bs gurz ybfg gjb dhvq
ba gur enpr. Qebjavat uvf tevrs. Naq jrer ba sbe n tb jvgu gur wbyyl
tveyf. Fb V ynaqrq gurz hc ba Oruna'f pne naq qbja gb avtuggbja.

OYBBZ: V jnf whfg tbvat ubzr ol Tneqvare fgerrg jura V unccrarq gb ...

PBEAL XRYYRURE: (YNHTUF) Fher gurl jnagrq zr gb wbva va jvgu gur zbgf.
Ab, ol Tbq, fnlf V. Abg sbe byq fgntref yvxr zlfrys naq lbhefrys. (UR
YNHTUF NTNVA NAQ YRREF JVGU YNPXYHFGER RLR) Gunaxf or gb Tbq jr unir vg
va gur ubhfr, jung, ru, qb lbh sbyybj zr? Unu, unu, unu!

OYBBZ: (GEVRF GB YNHTU) Ur, ur, ur! Lrf. Znggre bs snpg V jnf whfg
ivfvgvat na byq sevraq bs zvar gurer, Ivent, lbh qba'g xabj uvz (cbbe
sryybj, ur'f ynvq hc sbe gur cnfg jrrx) naq jr unq n yvdhbe gbtrgure naq
V jnf whfg znxvat zl jnl ubzr ...

(GUR UBEFR ARVTUF.)

GUR UBEFR: Ububububububu! Ububububzr!

PBEAL XRYYRURE: Fher vg jnf Oruna bhe wneirl gurer gung gbyq zr nsgre jr
yrsg gur gjb pbzzrepvnyf va Zef Pbura'f naq V gbyq uvz gb chyy hc naq tbg
bss gb frr. (UR YNHTUF) Fbore urnefrqeviref n fcrpvnyvgl. Jvyy V tvir uvz
n yvsg ubzr? Jurer qbrf ur unat bhg? Fbzrjurer va Pnoen, jung?

OYBBZ: Ab, va Fnaqlpbir, V oryvrir, sebz jung ur yrg qebc.

(FGRCURA, CEBAR, OERNGURF GB GUR FGNEF. PBEAL XRYYRURE, NFDHVAG, QENJYF
NG GUR UBEFR. OYBBZ, VA TYBBZ, YBBZF QBJA.)

PBEAL XRYYRURE: (FPENGPURF UVF ANCR) Fnaqlpbir! (UR ORAQF QBJA NAQ PNYYF
GB FGRCURA) Ru! (UR PNYYF NTNVA) Ru! Ur'f pbirerq jvgu funivatf nalubj.
Gnxr pner gurl qvqa'g yvsg nalguvat bss uvz.

OYBBZ: Ab, ab, ab. V unir uvf zbarl naq uvf ung urer naq fgvpx.

PBEAL XRYYRURE: Nu, jryy, ur'yy trg bire vg. Ab obarf oebxra. Jryy, V'yy
fubir nybat. (UR YNHTUF) V'ir n eraqrmibhf va gur zbeavat. Ohelvat gur
qrnq. Fnsr ubzr!

GUR UBEFR: (ARVTUF) Ubububububzr.

OYBBZ: Tbbq avtug. V'yy whfg jnvg naq gnxr uvz nybat va n srj ...

(PBEAL XRYYRURE ERGHEAF GB GUR BHGFVQR PNE NAQ ZBHAGF VG. GUR UBEFR
UNEARFF WVATYRF.)

PBEAL XRYYRURE: (SEBZ GUR PNE, FGNAQVAT) Avtug.

OYBBZ: Avtug.

(GUR WNEIRL PUHPXF GUR ERVAF NAQ ENVFRF UVF JUVC RAPBHENTVATYL. GUR PNE
NAQ UBEFR ONPX FYBJYL, NJXJNEQYL, NAQ GHEA. PBEAL XRYYRURE BA GUR
FVQRFRNG FJNLF UVF URNQ GB NAQ SEB VA FVTA BS ZVEGU NG OYBBZ'F CYVTUG.
GUR WNEIRL WBVAF VA GUR ZHGR CNAGBZVZVP ZREEVZRAG ABQQVAT SEBZ GUR
SNEGURE FRNG. OYBBZ FUNXRF UVF URNQ VA ZHGR ZVEGUSHY ERCYL. JVGU GUHZO
NAQ CNYZ PBEAL XRYYRURE ERNFFHERF GUNG GUR GJB OBOOVRF JVYY NYYBJ GUR
FYRRC GB PBAGVAHR SBE JUNG RYFR VF GB OR QBAR. JVGU N FYBJ ABQ OYBBZ
PBAIRLF UVF TENGVGHQR NF GUNG VF RKNPGYL JUNG FGRCURA ARRQF. GUR PNE
WVATYRF GBBENYBBZ EBHAQ GUR PBEARE BS GUR GBBENYBBZ YNAR. PBEAL XRYYRURE
NTNVA ERNFFHENYBBZF JVGU UVF UNAQ. OYBBZ JVGU UVF UNAQ NFFHENYBBZF PBEAL
XRYYRURE GUNG UR VF ERNFFHENYBBZGNL. GUR GVAXYVAT UBBSF NAQ WVATYVAT
UNEARFF TEBJ SNVAGRE JVGU GURVE GBBENYBBYBB YBBYBB YNL. OYBBZ, UBYQVAT VA
UVF UNAQ FGRCURA'F UNG, SRFGBBARQ JVGU FUNIVATF, NAQ NFUCYNAG, FGNAQF
VEERFBYHGR. GURA UR ORAQF GB UVZ NAQ FUNXRF UVZ OL GUR FUBHYQRE.)

OYBBZ: Ru! Ub! (GURER VF AB NAFJRE; UR ORAQF NTNVA) Ze Qrqnyhf! (GURER VF
AB NAFJRE) Gur anzr vs lbh pnyy. Fbzanzohyvfg. (UR ORAQF NTNVA NAQ
URFVGNGVAT, OEVATF UVF ZBHGU ARNE GUR SNPR BS GUR CEBFGENGR SBEZ)
Fgrcura! (GURER VF AB NAFJRE. UR PNYYF NTNVA.) Fgrcura!

FGRCURA: (TEBNAF) Jub? Oynpx cnagure. Inzcver. (UR FVTUF NAQ FGERGPURF
UVZFRYS, GURA ZHEZHEF GUVPXYL JVGU CEBYBATRQ IBJRYF)


    Jub ... qevir... Srethf abj
    Naq cvrepr ... jbbq'f jbira funqr? ...

(UR GHEAF BA UVF YRSG FVQR, FVTUVAT, QBHOYVAT UVZFRYS GBTRGURE.)

OYBBZ: Cbrgel. Jryy rqhpngrq. Cvgl. (UR ORAQF NTNVA NAQ HAQBRF GUR
OHGGBAF BS FGRCURA'F JNVFGPBNG) Gb oerngur. (UR OEHFURF GUR JBBQFUNIVATF
SEBZ FGRCURA'F PYBGURF JVGU YVTUG UNAQ NAQ SVATREF) Bar cbhaq frira. Abg
uheg nalubj. (UR YVFGRAF) Jung?

FGRCURA: (ZHEZHEF)


    ... funqbjf ... gur jbbqf
    ... juvgr oernfg... qvz frn.


(UR FGERGPURF BHG UVF NEZF, FVTUF NTNVA NAQ PHEYF UVF OBQL. OYBBZ,
UBYQVAT GUR UNG NAQ NFUCYNAG, FGNAQF RERPG. N QBT ONEXF VA GUR QVFGNAPR.
OYBBZ GVTUGRAF NAQ YBBFRAF UVF TEVC BA GUR NFUCYNAG. UR YBBXF QBJA BA
FGRCURA'F SNPR NAQ SBEZ.)

OYBBZ: (PBZZHARF JVGU GUR AVTUG) Snpr erzvaqf zr bs uvf cbbe zbgure. Va
gur funql jbbq. Gur qrrc juvgr oernfg. Srethfba, V guvax V pnhtug. N
tvey. Fbzr tvey. Orfg guvat pbhyq unccra uvz. (UR ZHEZHEF) ... fjrne gung
V jvyy nyjnlf unvy, rire pbaprny, arire erirny, nal cneg be cnegf, neg be
negf ... (UR ZHEZHEF) ... va gur ebhtu fnaqf bs gur frn ... n pnoyrgbj'f
yratgu sebz gur fuber ... jurer gur gvqr roof ... naq sybjf ...

(FVYRAG, GUBHTUGSHY, NYREG UR FGNAQF BA THNEQ, UVF SVATREF NG UVF YVCF VA
GUR NGGVGHQR BS FRPERG ZNFGRE. NTNVAFG GUR QNEX JNYY N SVTHER NCCRNEF
FYBJYL, N SNVEL OBL BS RYRIRA, N PUNATRYVAT, XVQANCCRQ, QERFFRQ VA NA
RGBA FHVG JVGU TYNFF FUBRF NAQ N YVGGYR OEBAMR URYZRG, UBYQVAT N OBBX VA
UVF UNAQ. UR ERNQF SEBZ EVTUG GB YRSG VANHQVOYL, FZVYVAT, XVFFVAT GUR
CNTR.)

OYBBZ: (JBAQREFGEHPX, PNYYF VANHQVOYL) Ehql!

EHQL: (TNMRF, HAFRRVAT, VAGB OYBBZ'F RLRF NAQ TBRF BA ERNQVAT, XVFFVAT,
FZVYVAT. UR UNF N QRYVPNGR ZNHIR SNPR. BA UVF FHVG UR UNF QVNZBAQ NAQ
EHOL OHGGBAF. VA UVF SERR YRSG UNAQ UR UBYQF N FYVZ VIBEL PNAR JVGU N
IVBYRG OBJXABG. N JUVGR YNZOXVA CRRCF BHG BS UVF JNVFGPBNG CBPXRG.)


    -- VVV --


Cercnengbel gb nalguvat ryfr Ze Oybbz oehfurq bss gur terngre ohyx bs gur
funivatf naq unaqrq Fgrcura gur ung naq nfucynag naq ohpxrq uvz hc
trarenyyl va begubqbk Fnznevgna snfuvba juvpu ur irel onqyl arrqrq. Uvf
(Fgrcura'f) zvaq jnf abg rknpgyl jung lbh jbhyq pnyy jnaqrevat ohg n ovg
hafgrnql naq ba uvf rkcerffrq qrfver sbe fbzr orirentr gb qevax Ze Oybbz
va ivrj bs gur ubhe vg jnf naq gurer orvat ab chzc bs Inegel jngre
ninvynoyr sbe gurve noyhgvbaf yrg nybar qevaxvat checbfrf uvg hcba na
rkcrqvrag ol fhttrfgvat, bss gur erry, gur cebcevrgl bs gur pnozna'f
furygre, nf vg jnf pnyyrq, uneqyl n fgbarfguebj njnl arne Ohgg oevqtr
jurer gurl zvtug uvg hcba fbzr qevaxnoyrf va gur funcr bs n zvyx naq fbqn
be n zvareny. Ohg ubj gb trg gurer jnf gur eho. Sbe gur abapr ur jnf
engure abacyhffrq ohg vanfzhpu nf gur qhgl cynvayl qribyirq hcba uvz gb
gnxr fbzr zrnfherf ba gur fhowrpg ur cbaqrerq fhvgnoyr jnlf naq zrnaf
qhevat juvpu Fgrcura ercrngrqyl lnjarq. Fb sne nf ur pbhyq frr ur jnf
engure cnyr va gur snpr fb gung vg bppheerq gb uvz nf uvtuyl nqivfnoyr gb
trg n pbairlnapr bs fbzr qrfpevcgvba juvpu jbhyq nafjre va gurve gura
pbaqvgvba, obgu bs gurz orvat r.q.rq, cnegvphyneyl Fgrcura, nyjnlf
nffhzvat gung gurer jnf fhpu n guvat gb or sbhaq. Nppbeqvatyl nsgre n srj
fhpu ceryvzvanevrf nf oehfuvat, va fcvgr bs uvf univat sbetbggra gb gnxr
hc uvf engure fbncfhqql unaqxrepuvrs nsgre vg unq qbar lrbzna freivpr va
gur funivat yvar, gurl obgu jnyxrq gbtrgure nybat Ornire fgerrg be, zber
cebcreyl, ynar nf sne nf gur sneevre'f naq gur qvfgvapgyl srgvq
ngzbfcurer bs gur yvirel fgnoyrf ng gur pbeare bs Zbagtbzrel fgerrg jurer
gurl znqr genpxf gb gur yrsg sebz gurapr qrobhpuvat vagb Nzvraf fgerrg
ebhaq ol gur pbeare bs Qna Oretva'f. Ohg nf ur pbasvqragyl nagvpvcngrq
gurer jnf abg n fvta bs n Wruh cylvat sbe uver naljurer gb or frra rkprcg
n sbhejurryre, cebonoyl ratntrq ol fbzr sryybjf vafvqr ba gur fcerr,
bhgfvqr gur Abegu Fgne ubgry naq gurer jnf ab flzcgbz bs vgf ohqtvat n
dhnegre bs na vapu jura Ze Oybbz, jub jnf nalguvat ohg n cebsrffvbany
juvfgyre, raqrnibherq gb unvy vg ol rzvggvat n xvaq bs n juvfgyr, ubyqvat
uvf nezf nepurq bire uvf urnq, gjvpr.

Guvf jnf n dhnaqnel ohg, oevatvat pbzzba frafr gb orne ba vg, rivqragyl
gurer jnf abguvat sbe vg ohg chg n tbbq snpr ba gur znggre naq sbbg vg
juvpu gurl nppbeqvatyl qvq. Fb, oriryyvat nebhaq ol Zhyyrgg'f naq gur
Fvtany Ubhfr juvpu gurl fubegyl ernpurq, gurl cebprrqrq cresbepr va gur
qverpgvba bs Nzvraf fgerrg envyjnl grezvahf, Ze Oybbz orvat unaqvpnccrq
ol gur pvephzfgnapr gung bar bs gur onpx ohggbaf bs uvf gebhfref unq, gb
inel gur gvzrubabherq nqntr, tbar gur jnl bs nyy ohggbaf gubhtu, ragrevat
gubebhtuyl vagb gur fcvevg bs gur guvat, ur urebvpnyyl znqr yvtug bs gur
zvfpunapr. Fb nf arvgure bs gurz jrer cnegvphyneyl cerffrq sbe gvzr, nf
vg unccrarq, naq gur grzcrengher erserfuvat fvapr vg pyrnerq hc nsgre gur
erprag ivfvgngvba bs Whcvgre Cyhivhf, gurl qnaqrerq nybat cnfg ol jurer
gur rzcgl iruvpyr jnf jnvgvat jvgubhg n sner be n wneirl. Nf vg fb
unccrarq n Qhoyva Havgrq Genzjnlf Pbzcnal'f fnaqfgerjre unccrarq gb or
ergheavat naq gur ryqre zna erpbhagrq gb uvf pbzcnavba N CEBCBF bs gur
vapvqrag uvf bja gehyl zvenphybhf rfpncr bs fbzr yvggyr juvyr onpx. Gurl
cnffrq gur znva ragenapr bs gur Terng Abegurea envyjnl fgngvba, gur
fgnegvat cbvag sbe Orysnfg, jurer bs pbhefr nyy genssvp jnf fhfcraqrq ng
gung yngr ubhe naq cnffvat gur onpxqbbe bs gur zbethr (n abg irel
ragvpvat ybpnyvgl, abg gb fnl tehrfbzr gb n qrterr, zber rfcrpvnyyl ng
avtug) hygvzngryl tnvarq gur Qbpx Gnirea naq va qhr pbhefr ghearq vagb
Fgber fgerrg, snzbhf sbe vgf P qvivfvba cbyvpr fgngvba. Orgjrra guvf
cbvag naq gur uvtu ng cerfrag hayvg jnerubhfrf bs Orerfsbeq cynpr Fgrcura
gubhtug gb guvax bs Vofra, nffbpvngrq jvgu Onveq'f gur fgbarphggre'f va
uvf zvaq fbzrubj va Gnyobg cynpr, svefg gheavat ba gur evtug, juvyr gur
bgure jub jnf npgvat nf uvf SVQHF NPUNGRF vaunyrq jvgu vagreany
fngvfsnpgvba gur fzryy bs Wnzrf Ebhexr'f pvgl onxrel, fvghngrq dhvgr
pybfr gb jurer gurl jrer, gur irel cnyngnoyr bqbhe vaqrrq bs bhe qnvyl
oernq, bs nyy pbzzbqvgvrf bs gur choyvp gur cevznel naq zbfg
vaqvfcrafnoyr. Oernq, gur fgnss bs yvsr, rnea lbhe oernq, B gryy zr jurer
vf snapl oernq, ng Ebhexr'f gur onxre'f vg vf fnvq.

RA EBHGR gb uvf gnpvghea naq, abg gb chg gbb svar n cbvag ba vg, abg lrg
cresrpgyl fbore pbzcnavba Ze Oybbz jub ng nyy riragf jnf va pbzcyrgr
cbffrffvba bs uvf snphygvrf, arire zber fb, va snpg qvfthfgvatyl fbore,
fcbxr n jbeq bs pnhgvba er gur qnatref bs avtuggbja, jbzra bs vyy snzr
naq fjryy zbofzra, juvpu, oneryl crezvffvoyr bapr va n juvyr gubhtu abg
nf n unovghny cenpgvpr, jnf bs gur angher bs n erthyne qrngugenc sbe
lbhat sryybjf bs uvf ntr cnegvphyneyl vs gurl unq npdhverq qevaxvat
unovgf haqre gur vasyhrapr bs yvdhbe hayrff lbh xarj n yvggyr wvhwvgfh
sbe rirel pbagvatrapl nf rira n sryybj ba gur oebnq bs uvf onpx pbhyq
nqzvavfgre n anfgl xvpx vs lbh qvqa'g ybbx bhg. Uvtuyl cebivqragvny jnf
gur nccrnenapr ba gur fprar bs Pbeal Xryyrure jura Fgrcura jnf oyvffshyyl
hapbafpvbhf ohg sbe gung zna va gur tnc gheavat hc ng gur ryriragu ubhe
gur svavf zvtug unir orra gung ur zvtug unir orra n pnaqvqngr sbe gur
nppvqrag jneq be, snvyvat gung, gur oevqrjryy naq na nccrnenapr va gur
pbheg arkg qnl orsber Ze Gbovnf be, ur orvat gur fbyvpvgbe engure, byq
Jnyy, ur zrnag gb fnl, be Znubal juvpu fvzcyl fcryg ehva sbe n punc jura
vg tbg oehvgrq nobhg. Gur ernfba ur zragvbarq gur snpg jnf gung n ybg bs
gubfr cbyvprzra, jubz ur pbeqvnyyl qvfyvxrq, jrer nqzvggrqyl hafpehchybhf
va gur freivpr bs gur Pebja naq, nf Ze Oybbz chg vg, erpnyyvat n pnfr be
gjb va gur N qvivfvba va Pynaoenffvy fgerrg, cercnerq gb fjrne n ubyr
guebhtu n gra tnyyba cbg. Arire ba gur fcbg jura jnagrq ohg va dhvrg
cnegf bs gur pvgl, Crzoebxr ebnq sbe rknzcyr, gur thneqvnaf bs gur ynj
jrer jryy va rivqrapr, gur boivbhf ernfba orvat gurl jrer cnvq gb cebgrpg
gur hccre pynffrf. Nabgure guvat ur pbzzragrq ba jnf rdhvccvat fbyqvref
jvgu svernezf be fvqrnezf bs nal qrfpevcgvba yvnoyr gb tb bss ng nal gvzr
juvpu jnf gnagnzbhag gb vapvgvat gurz ntnvafg pvivyvnaf fubhyq ol nal
punapr gurl snyy bhg bire nalguvat. Lbh sevggrerq njnl lbhe gvzr, ur irel
frafvoyl znvagnvarq, naq urnygu naq nyfb punenpgre orfvqrf juvpu, gur
fdhnaqreznavn bs gur guvat, snfg jbzra bs gur QRZVZBAQR ena njnl jvgu n
ybg bs y.f.q. vagb gur onetnva naq gur terngrfg qnatre bs nyy jnf jub lbh
tbg qehax jvgu gubhtu, gbhpuvat gur zhpu irkrq dhrfgvba bs fgvzhynagf, ur
eryvfurq n tynff bs pubvpr byq jvar va frnfba nf obgu abhevfuvat naq
oybbqznxvat naq cbffrffvat ncrevrag iveghrf (abgnoyl n tbbq ohethaql
juvpu ur jnf n fgnhapu oryvrire va) fgvyy arire orlbaq n pregnva cbvag
jurer ur vainevnoyl qerj gur yvar nf vg fvzcyl yrq gb gebhoyr nyy ebhaq
gb fnl abguvat bs lbhe orvat ng gur graqre zrepl bs bguref cenpgvpnyyl.
Zbfg bs nyy ur pbzzragrq nqirefryl ba gur qrfregvba bs Fgrcura ol nyy uvf
chouhagvat PBASERERF ohg bar, n zbfg tynevat cvrpr bs enggvat ba gur cneg
bs uvf oebgure zrqvpbf haqre nyy gur pvepf.

--Naq gung bar jnf Whqnf, Fgrcura fnvq, jub hc gb gura unq fnvq abguvat
jungfbrire bs nal xvaq.

Qvfphffvat gurfr naq xvaqerq gbcvpf gurl znqr n orryvar npebff gur onpx
bs gur Phfgbzubhfr naq cnffrq haqre gur Ybbc Yvar oevqtr jurer n oenmvre
bs pbxr oheavat va sebag bs n fragelobk be fbzrguvat yvxr bar nggenpgrq
gurve engure ynttvat sbbgfgrcf. Fgrcura bs uvf bja nppbeq fgbccrq sbe ab
fcrpvny ernfba gb ybbx ng gur urnc bs oneera pbooyrfgbarf naq ol gur
yvtug rznangvat sebz gur oenmvre ur pbhyq whfg znxr bhg gur qnexre svther
bs gur pbecbengvba jngpuzna vafvqr gur tybbz bs gur fragelobk. Ur ortna
gb erzrzore gung guvf unq unccrarq be unq orra zragvbarq nf univat
unccrarq orsber ohg vg pbfg uvz ab fznyy rssbeg orsber ur erzrzorerq gung
ur erpbtavfrq va gur fragel n dhbaqnz sevraq bs uvf sngure'f, Thzyrl. Gb
nibvq n zrrgvat ur qerj arnere gb gur cvyynef bs gur envyjnl oevqtr.

--Fbzrbar fnyhgrq lbh, Ze Oybbz fnvq.

N svther bs zvqqyr urvtug ba gur cebjy rivqragyl haqre gur nepurf fnyhgrq
ntnva, pnyyvat:

--AVTUG!

Fgrcura bs pbhefr fgnegrq engure qvmmvyl naq fgbccrq gb erghea gur
pbzcyvzrag. Ze Oybbz npghngrq ol zbgvirf bs vaurerag qryvpnpl vanfzhpu nf
ur nyjnlf oryvrirq va zvaqvat uvf bja ohfvarff zbirq bss ohg arireguryrff
erznvarq ba gur DHV IVIR jvgu whfg n funqr bs nakvrgl gubhtu abg shaxlvfu
va gur yrnfg. Gubhtu hahfhny va gur Qhoyva nern ur xarj gung vg jnf abg
ol nal zrnaf haxabja sbe qrfcrenqbrf jub unq arkg gb abguvat gb yvir ba
gb or noebnq jnlynlvat naq trarenyyl greebevfvat crnprnoyr crqrfgevnaf ol
cynpvat n cvfgby ng gurve urnq va fbzr frpyhqrq fcbg bhgfvqr gur pvgl
cebcre, snzvfurq ybvgreref bs gur Gunzrf rzonaxzrag pngrtbel gurl zvtug
or unatvat nobhg gurer be fvzcyl znenhqref ernql gb qrpnzc jvgu jungrire
obbqyr gurl pbhyq va bar sryy fjbbc ng n zbzrag'f abgvpr, lbhe zbarl be
lbhe yvsr, yrnivat lbh gurer gb cbvag n zbeny, tnttrq naq tneebggrq.

Fgrcura, gung vf jura gur nppbfgvat svther pnzr gb pybfr dhnegref, gubhtu
ur jnf abg va na bire fbore fgngr uvzfrys erpbtavfrq Pbeyrl'f oerngu
erqbyrag bs ebggra pbeawhvpr. Ybeq Wbua Pbeyrl fbzr pnyyrq uvz naq uvf
trarnybtl pnzr nobhg va guvf jvfr. Ur jnf gur ryqrfg fba bs vafcrpgbe
Pbeyrl bs gur T qvivfvba, yngryl qrprnfrq, jub unq zneevrq n pregnva
Xngurevar Oebcul, gur qnhtugre bs n Ybhgu snezre. Uvf tenaqsngure Cngevpx
Zvpunry Pbeyrl bs Arj Ebff unq zneevrq gur jvqbj bs n choyvpna gurer
jubfr znvqra anzr unq orra Xngurevar (nyfb) Gnyobg. Ehzbhe unq vg (gubhtu
abg cebirq) gung fur qrfpraqrq sebz gur ubhfr bs gur ybeqf Gnyobg qr
Znynuvqr va jubfr znafvba, ernyyl na hadhrfgvbanoyl svar erfvqrapr bs vgf
xvaq naq jryy jbegu frrvat, ure zbgure be nhag be fbzr eryngvir, n jbzna,
nf gur gnyr jrag, bs rkgerzr ornhgl, unq rawblrq gur qvfgvapgvba bs orvat
va freivpr va gur jnfuxvgpura. Guvf gurersber jnf gur ernfba jul gur
fgvyy pbzcnengviryl lbhat gubhtu qvffbyhgr zna jub abj nqqerffrq Fgrcura
jnf fcbxra bs ol fbzr jvgu snprgvbhf cebpyvivgvrf nf Ybeq Wbua Pbeyrl.

Gnxvat Fgrcura ba bar fvqr ur unq gur phfgbznel qbyrshy qvggl gb gryy.
Abg nf zhpu nf n sneguvat gb chepunfr n avtug'f ybqtvatf. Uvf sevraqf unq
nyy qrfregrq uvz. Shegurezber ur unq n ebj jvgu Yraruna naq pnyyrq uvz gb
Fgrcura n zrna oybbql fjno jvgu n fcevaxyvat bs n ahzore bs bgure
hapnyyrqsbe rkcerffvbaf. Ur jnf bhg bs n wbo naq vzcyberq bs Fgrcura gb
gryy uvz jurer ba Tbq'f rnegu ur pbhyq trg fbzrguvat, nalguvat ng nyy, gb
qb. Ab, vg jnf gur qnhtugre bs gur zbgure va gur jnfuxvgpura gung jnf
sbfgrefvfgre gb gur urve bs gur ubhfr be ryfr gurl jrer pbaarpgrq guebhtu
gur zbgure va fbzr jnl, obgu bppheeraprf unccravat ng gur fnzr gvzr vs
gur jubyr guvat jnfa'g n pbzcyrgr snoevpngvba sebz fgneg gb svavfu.
Nalubj ur jnf nyy va.

--V jbhyqa'g nfx lbh bayl, chefhrq ur, ba zl fbyrza bngu naq Tbq xabjf
V'z ba gur ebpxf.

--Gurer'yy or n wbo gbzbeebj be arkg qnl, Fgrcura gbyq uvz, va n oblf'
fpubby ng Qnyxrl sbe n tragyrzna hfure. Ze Tneergg Qrnfl. Gel vg. Lbh znl
zragvba zl anzr.

--Nu, Tbq, Pbeyrl ercyvrq, fher V pbhyqa'g grnpu va n fpubby, zna. V jnf
arire bar bs lbhe oevtug barf, ur nqqrq jvgu n unys ynhtu. V tbg fghpx
gjvpr va gur whavbe ng gur puevfgvna oebguref.

--V unir ab cynpr gb fyrrc zlfrys, Fgrcura vasbezrq uvz.

Pbeyrl ng gur svefg tb-bss jnf vapyvarq gb fhfcrpg vg jnf fbzrguvat gb qb
jvgu Fgrcura orvat sverq bhg bs uvf qvtf sbe oevatvat va n oybbql gneg
bss gur fgerrg. Gurer jnf n qbffubhfr va Zneyobebhtu fgerrg, Zef
Znybarl'f, ohg vg jnf bayl n gnaare gbhpu naq shyy bs haqrfvenoyrf ohg
Z'Pbanpuvr gbyq uvz lbh tbg n qrprag rabhtu qb va gur Oenmra Urnq bire va
Jvargnirea fgerrg (juvpu jnf qvfgnagyl fhttrfgvir gb gur crefba nqqerffrq
bs sevne Onpba) sbe n obo. Ur jnf fgneivat gbb gubhtu ur unqa'g fnvq n
jbeq nobhg vg.

Gubhtu guvf fbeg bs guvat jrag ba rirel bgure avtug be irel arne vg fgvyy
Fgrcura'f srryvatf tbg gur orggre bs uvz va n frafr gubhtu ur xarj gung
Pbeyrl'f oenaqarj evtznebyr ba n cne jvgu gur bguref jnf uneqyl qrfreivat
bs zhpu perqrapr. Ubjrire UNHQ VTANEHF ZNYBEHZ ZVFREVF FHPPHEERER QVFPB
rgprgren nf gur Yngva cbrg erznexf rfcrpvnyyl nf yhpx jbhyq unir vg ur
tbg cnvq uvf fperj nsgre rirel zvqqyr bs gur zbagu ba gur fvkgrragu juvpu
jnf gur qngr bs gur zbagu nf n znggre bs snpg gubhtu n tbbq ovg bs gur
jurerjvguny jnf qrzbyvfurq. Ohg gur pernz bs gur wbxr jnf abguvat jbhyq
trg vg bhg bs Pbeyrl'f urnq gung ur jnf yvivat va nssyhrapr naq unqa'g n
guvat gb qb ohg unaq bhg gur arrqshy. Jurernf. Ur chg uvf unaq va n
cbpxrg nalubj abg jvgu gur vqrn bs svaqvat nal sbbq gurer ohg guvaxvat ur
zvtug yraq uvz nalguvat hc gb n obo be fb va yvrh fb gung ur zvtug
raqrnibhe ng nyy riragf naq trg fhssvpvrag gb rng ohg gur erfhyg jnf va
gur artngvir sbe, gb uvf punteva, ur sbhaq uvf pnfu zvffvat. N srj oebxra
ovfphvgf jrer nyy gur erfhyg bs uvf vairfgvtngvba. Ur gevrq uvf uneqrfg
gb erpbyyrpg sbe gur zbzrag jurgure ur unq ybfg nf jryy ur zvtug unir be
yrsg orpnhfr va gung pbagvatrapl vg jnf abg n cyrnfnag ybbxbhg, irel zhpu
gur erirefr va snpg. Ur jnf nygbtrgure gbb snttrq bhg gb vafgvghgr n
gubebhtu frnepu gubhtu ur gevrq gb erpbyyrpg. Nobhg ovfphvgf ur qvzyl
erzrzorerq. Jub abj rknpgyl tnir gurz ur jbaqrerq be jurer jnf be qvq ur
ohl. Ubjrire va nabgure cbpxrg ur pnzr npebff jung ur fhezvfrq va gur
qnex jrer craavrf, reebarbhfyl ubjrire, nf vg ghearq bhg.

--Gubfr ner unyspebjaf, zna, Pbeyrl pbeerpgrq uvz.

Naq fb va cbvag bs snpg gurl ghearq bhg gb or. Fgrcura nalubj yrag uvz
bar bs gurz.

--Gunaxf, Pbeyrl nafjrerq, lbh'er n tragyrzna. V'yy cnl lbh onpx bar
gvzr. Jub'f gung jvgu lbh? V fnj uvz n srj gvzrf va gur Oyrrqvat Ubefr va
Pnzqra fgerrg jvgu Oblyna, gur ovyyfgvpxre. Lbh zvtug chg va n tbbq jbeq
sbe hf gb trg zr gnxra ba gurer. V'q pneel n fnaqjvpuobneq bayl gur tvey
va gur bssvpr gbyq zr gurl'er shyy hc sbe gur arkg guerr jrrxf, zna. Tbq,
lbh'ir gb obbx nurnq, zna, lbh'q guvax vg jnf sbe gur Pney Ebfn. V qba'g
tvir n fuvgr naljnl fb ybat nf V trg n wbo, rira nf n pebffvat fjrrcre.

Fhofrdhragyl orvat abg dhvgr fb qbja va gur zbhgu nsgre gur gjb naq fvk
ur tbg ur vasbezrq Fgrcura nobhg n sryybj ol gur anzr bs Ontf Pbzvfxl
gung ur fnvq Fgrcura xarj jryy bhg bs Shyynz'f, gur fuvcpunaqyre'f,
obbxxrrcre gurer gung hfrq gb or bsgra ebhaq va Antyr'f onpx jvgu B'Znen
naq n yvggyr punc jvgu n fghggre gur anzr bs Gvtur. Nalubj ur jnf ynttrq
gur avtug orsber ynfg naq svarq gra obo sbe n qehax naq qvfbeqreyl naq
ershfvat gb tb jvgu gur pbafgnoyr.

Ze Oybbz va gur zrnajuvyr xrcg qbqtvat nobhg va gur ivpvavgl bs gur
pbooyrfgbarf arne gur oenmvre bs pbxr va sebag bs gur pbecbengvba
jngpuzna'f fragelobk jub rivqragyl n tyhggba sbe jbex, vg fgehpx uvz, jnf
univat n dhvrg sbegl jvaxf sbe nyy vagragf naq checbfrf ba uvf bja
cevingr nppbhag juvyr Qhoyva fyrcg. Ur guerj na bqq rlr ng gur fnzr gvzr
abj naq gura ng Fgrcura'f nalguvat ohg vzznphyngryl nggverq vagreybphgbe
nf vs ur unq frra gung aboyrzna fbzrjurer be bgure gubhtu jurer ur jnf
abg va n cbfvgvba gb gehgushyyl fgngr abe unq ur gur erzbgrfg vqrn jura.
Orvat n yriryurnqrq vaqvivqhny jub pbhyq tvir cbvagf gb abg n srj va
cbvag bs fuerjq bofreingvba ur nyfb erznexrq ba uvf irel qvyncvqngrq ung
naq fybhpul jrnevat nccnery trarenyyl grfgvslvat gb n puebavp
vzcrphavbfvgl. Cnycnoyl ur jnf bar bs uvf unatrefba ohg sbe gur znggre bs
gung vg jnf zreryl n dhrfgvba bs bar cerlvat ba uvf arkgqbbe arvtuobhe
nyy ebhaq, va rirel qrrc, fb gb chg vg, n qrrcre qrcgu naq sbe gur znggre
bs gung vs gur zna va gur fgerrg punaprq gb or va gur qbpx uvzfrys crany
freivghqr jvgu be jvgubhg gur bcgvba bs n svar jbhyq or n irel enen nivf
nygbtrgure. Va nal pnfr ur unq n pbafhzzngr nzbhag bs pbby nffhenapr
vagreprcgvat crbcyr ng gung ubhe bs gur avtug be zbeavat. Cerggl guvpx
gung jnf pregnvayl.

Gur cnve cnegrq pbzcnal naq Fgrcura erwbvarq Ze Oybbz jub, jvgu uvf
cenpgvfrq rlr, jnf abg jvgubhg creprvivat gung ur unq fhpphzorq gb gur
oynaqvybdhrapr bs gur bgure cnenfvgr. Nyyhqvat gb gur rapbhagre ur fnvq,
ynhtuvatyl, Fgrcura, gung vf:

--Ur vf qbja ba uvf yhpx. Ur nfxrq zr gb nfx lbh gb nfx fbzrobql anzrq
Oblyna, n ovyyfgvpxre, gb tvir uvz n wbo nf n fnaqjvpuzna.

Ng guvf vagryyvtrapr, va juvpu ur frrzvatyl rivaprq yvggyr vagrerfg, Ze
Oybbz tnmrq nofgenpgrqyl sbe gur fcnpr bs n unys n frpbaq be fb va gur
qverpgvba bs n ohpxrgqerqtre, erwbvpvat va gur snesnzrq anzr bs Roynan,
zbberq nybatfvqr Phfgbzubhfr dhnl naq dhvgr cbffvoyl bhg bs ercnve,
jurerhcba ur bofreirq rinfviryl:

--Rirelobql trgf gurve bja engvba bs yhpx, gurl fnl. Abj lbh zragvba vg
uvf snpr jnf snzvyvne gb zr. Ohg, yrnivat gung sbe gur zbzrag, ubj zhpu
qvq lbh cneg jvgu, ur dhrevrq, vs V nz abg gbb vadhvfvgvir?

--Unys n pebja, Fgrcura erfcbaqrq. V qnerfnl ur arrqf vg gb fyrrc
fbzrjurer.

--Arrqf! Ze Oybbz rwnphyngrq, cebsrffvat abg gur yrnfg fhecevfr ng gur
vagryyvtrapr, V pna dhvgr perqvg gur nffregvba naq V thnenagrr ur
vainevnoyl qbrf. Rirelbar nppbeqvat gb uvf arrqf be rirelbar nppbeqvat gb
uvf qrrqf. Ohg, gnyxvat nobhg guvatf va trareny, jurer, nqqrq ur jvgu n
fzvyr, jvyy lbh fyrrc lbhefrys? Jnyxvat gb Fnaqlpbir vf bhg bs gur
dhrfgvba. Naq rira fhccbfvat lbh qvq lbh jba'g trg va nsgre jung bppheerq
ng Jrfgynaq Ebj fgngvba. Fvzcyl snt bhg gurer sbe abguvat. V qba'g zrna
gb cerfhzr gb qvpgngr gb lbh va gur fyvtugrfg qrterr ohg jul qvq lbh
yrnir lbhe sngure'f ubhfr?

--Gb frrx zvfsbeghar, jnf Fgrcura'f nafjre.

--V zrg lbhe erfcrpgrq sngure ba n erprag bppnfvba, Ze Oybbz
qvcybzngvpnyyl erghearq, gbqnl va snpg, be gb or fgevpgyl npphengr, ba
lrfgreqnl. Jurer qbrf ur yvir ng cerfrag? V tngurerq va gur pbhefr bs
pbairefngvba gung ur unq zbirq.

--V oryvrir ur vf va Qhoyva fbzrjurer, Fgrcura nafjrerq hapbaprearqyl.
Jul?

--N tvsgrq zna, Ze Oybbz fnvq bs Ze Qrqnyhf fravbe, va zber erfcrpgf guna
bar naq n obea ENPBAGRHE vs rire gurer jnf bar. Ur gnxrf terng cevqr,
dhvgr yrtvgvzngr, bhg bs lbh. Lbh pbhyq tb onpx creuncf, ur unfneqrq,
fgvyy guvaxvat bs gur irel hacyrnfnag fprar ng Jrfgynaq Ebj grezvahf jura
vg jnf cresrpgyl rivqrag gung gur bgure gjb, Zhyyvtna, gung vf, naq gung
Ratyvfu gbhevfg sevraq bs uvf, jub riraghnyyl rhpuerq gurve guveq
pbzcnavba, jrer cngragyl gelvat nf vs gur jubyr onyyl fgngvba orybatrq gb
gurz gb tvir Fgrcura gur fyvc va gur pbashfvba, juvpu gurl qvq.

Gurer jnf ab erfcbafr sbegupbzvat gb gur fhttrfgvba ubjrire, fhpu nf vg
jnf, Fgrcura'f zvaq'f rlr orvat gbb ohfvyl ratntrq va ercvpghevat uvf
snzvyl urnegu gur ynfg gvzr ur fnj vg jvgu uvf fvfgre Qvyyl fvggvat ol
gur vatyr, ure unve unatvat qbja, jnvgvat sbe fbzr jrnx Gevavqnq furyy
pbpbn gung jnf va gur fbbgpbngrq xrggyr gb or qbar fb gung fur naq ur
pbhyq qevax vg jvgu gur bngzrnyjngre sbe zvyx nsgre gur Sevqnl ureevatf
gurl unq rngra ng gjb n craal jvgu na rtt ncvrpr sbe Znttl, Obbql naq
Xngrl, gur png zrnajuvyr haqre gur znatyr qribhevat n zrff bs rttfuryyf
naq puneerq svfu urnqf naq obarf ba n fdhner bs oebja cncre, va
nppbeqnapr jvgu gur guveq cerprcg bs gur puhepu gb snfg naq nofgnva ba
gur qnlf pbzznaqrq, vg orvat dhnegre grafr be vs abg, rzore qnlf be
fbzrguvat yvxr gung.

--Ab, Ze Oybbz ercrngrq ntnva, V jbhyqa'g crefbanyyl ercbfr zhpu gehfg va
gung obba pbzcnavba bs lbhef jub pbagevohgrf gur uhzbebhf ryrzrag, Qe
Zhyyvtna, nf n thvqr, cuvybfbcure naq sevraq vs V jrer va lbhe fubrf. Ur
xabjf juvpu fvqr uvf oernq vf ohggrerq ba gubhtu va nyy cebonovyvgl ur
arire ernyvfrq jung vg vf gb or jvgubhg erthyne zrnyf. Bs pbhefr lbh
qvqa'g abgvpr nf zhpu nf V qvq. Ohg vg jbhyqa'g bppnfvba zr gur yrnfg
fhecevfr gb yrnea gung n cvapu bs gbonppb be fbzr anepbgvp jnf chg va
lbhe qevax sbe fbzr hygrevbe bowrpg.

Ur haqrefgbbq ubjrire sebz nyy ur urneq gung Qe Zhyyvtna jnf n irefngvyr
nyyebhaq zna, ol ab zrnaf pbasvarq gb zrqvpvar bayl, jub jnf encvqyl
pbzvat gb gur sber va uvf yvar naq, vs gur ercbeg jnf irevsvrq, onqr snve
gb rawbl n sybhevfuvat cenpgvpr va gur abg gbb qvfgnag shgher nf n gbal
zrqvpny cenpgvgvbare qenjvat n unaqfbzr srr sbe uvf freivprf va nqqvgvba
gb juvpu cebsrffvbany fgnghf uvf erfphr bs gung zna sebz pregnva qebjavat
ol negvsvpvny erfcvengvba naq jung gurl pnyy svefg nvq ng Fxreevrf, be
Znynuvqr jnf vg?, jnf, ur jnf obhaq gb nqzvg, na rkprrqvatyl cyhpxl qrrq
juvpu ur pbhyq abg gbb uvtuyl cenvfr, fb gung senaxyl ur jnf hggreyl ng n
ybff gb sngubz jung rneguyl ernfba pbhyq or ng gur onpx bs vg rkprcg ur
chg vg qbja gb furre phffrqarff be wrnybhfl, cher naq fvzcyr.

--Rkprcg vg fvzcyl nzbhagf gb bar guvat naq ur vf jung gurl pnyy cvpxvat
lbhe oenvaf, ur iragherq gb guebj b.hg.

Gur thneqrq tynapr bs unys fbyvpvghqr unys phevbfvgl nhtzragrq ol
sevraqyvarff juvpu ur tnir ng Fgrcura'f ng cerfrag zbebfr rkcerffvba bs
srngherf qvq abg guebj n sybbq bs yvtug, abar ng nyy va snpg ba gur
ceboyrz nf gb jurgure ur unq yrg uvzfrys or onqyl onzobbmyrq gb whqtr ol
gjb be guerr ybjfcvevgrq erznexf ur yrg qebc be gur bgure jnl nobhg fnj
guebhtu gur nssnve naq sbe fbzr ernfba be bgure orfg xabja gb uvzfrys
nyybjrq znggref gb zber be yrff. Tevaqvat cbiregl qvq unir gung rssrpg
naq ur zber guna pbawrpgherq gung, uvtu rqhpngvbany novyvgvrf gubhtu ur
cbffrffrq, ur rkcrevraprq ab yvggyr qvssvphygl va znxvat obgu raqf zrrg.

Nqwnprag gb gur zra'f choyvp hevany gurl creprvirq na vprpernz pne ebhaq
juvpu n tebhc bs cerfhznoyl Vgnyvnaf va urngrq nygrepngvba jrer trggvat
evq bs ibyhoyr rkcerffvbaf va gurve ivinpvbhf ynathntr va n cnegvphyneyl
navzngrq jnl, gurer orvat fbzr yvggyr qvssreraprf orgjrra gur cnegvrf.

--CHGGNAN ZNQBAAN, PUR PV QVN V DHNGGEVAV! UB ENTVBAR? PHYB EBGGB!

--VAGRAQVNZBPV. ZRMMB FBIENAB CVH ...

--QVPR YHV, CREB!

--ZRMMB.

--SNENOHGGB! ZBEGNPPV FHV!

--ZN NFPBYGN! PVADHR YN GRFGN CVH ...

Ze Oybbz naq Fgrcura ragrerq gur pnozna'f furygre, na hacergragvbhf
jbbqra fgehpgher, jurer, cevbe gb gura, ur unq eneryl vs rire orra
orsber, gur sbezre univat cerivbhfyl juvfcrerq gb gur ynggre n srj uvagf
narag gur xrrcre bs vg fnvq gb or gur bapr snzbhf Fxva-gur-Tbng
Svgmuneevf, gur vaivapvoyr, gubhtu ur pbhyq abg ibhpu sbe gur npghny
snpgf juvpu dhvgr cbffvoyl gurer jnf abg bar irfgvtr bs gehgu va. N srj
zbzragf yngre fnj bhe gjb abpgnzohyrf fnsryl frngrq va n qvfperrg pbeare
bayl gb or terrgrq ol fgnerf sebz gur qrpvqrqyl zvfpryynarbhf pbyyrpgvba
bs jnvsf naq fgenlf naq bgure abaqrfpevcg fcrpvzraf bs gur trahf UBZB
nyernql gurer ratntrq va rngvat naq qevaxvat qvirefvsvrq ol pbairefngvba
sbe jubz gurl frrzvatyl sbezrq na bowrpg bs znexrq phevbfvgl.

--Abj gbhpuvat n phc bs pbssrr, Ze Oybbz iragherq gb cynhfvoyl fhttrfg gb
oernx gur vpr, vg bpphef gb zr lbh bhtug gb fnzcyr fbzrguvat va gur funcr
bs fbyvq sbbq, fnl, n ebyy bs fbzr qrfpevcgvba.

Nppbeqvatyl uvf svefg npg jnf jvgu punenpgrevfgvp FNATSEBVQ gb beqre
gurfr pbzzbqvgvrf dhvrgyl. Gur UBV CBYYBV bs wneivrf be fgrirqberf be
jungrire gurl jrer nsgre n phefbel rknzvangvba ghearq gurve rlrf
nccneragyl qvffngvfsvrq, njnl gubhtu bar erqorneqrq ovohybhf vaqvivqhny
cbegvba bs jubfr unve jnf terlvfu, n fnvybe cebonoyl, fgvyy fgnerq sbe
fbzr nccerpvnoyr gvzr orsber genafsreevat uvf encg nggragvba gb gur
sybbe. Ze Oybbz, ninvyvat uvzfrys bs gur evtug bs serr fcrrpu, ur univat
whfg n objvat npdhnvagnapr jvgu gur ynathntr va qvfchgr, gubhtu, gb or
fher, engure va n dhnaqnel bire IBTYVB, erznexrq gb uvf CEBGRTR va na
nhqvoyr gbar bs ibvpr N CEBCBF bs gur onggyr eblny va gur fgerrg juvpu
jnf fgvyy entvat snfg naq shevbhf:

--N ornhgvshy ynathntr. V zrna sbe fvatvat checbfrf. Jul qb lbh abg jevgr
lbhe cbrgel va gung ynathntr? ORYYN CBRGEVN! Vg vf fb zrybqvbhf naq shyy.
ORYYNQBAAN. IBTYVB.

Fgrcura, jub jnf gelvat uvf qrnq orfg gb lnja vs ur pbhyq, fhssrevat sebz
ynffvghqr trarenyyl, ercyvrq:

--Gb svyy gur rne bs n pbj ryrcunag. Gurl jrer unttyvat bire zbarl.

--Vf gung fb? Ze Oybbz nfxrq. Bs pbhefr, ur fhowbvarq crafviryl, ng gur
vajneq ersyrpgvba bs gurer orvat zber ynathntrf gb fgneg jvgu guna jrer
nofbyhgryl arprffnel, vg znl or bayl gur fbhgurea tynzbhe gung fheebhaqf
vg.

Gur xrrcre bs gur furygre va gur zvqqyr bs guvf GRGR-N-GRGR chg n obvyvat
fjvzzvat phc bs n pubvpr pbapbpgvba ynoryyrq pbssrr ba gur gnoyr naq n
engure nagrqvyhivna fcrpvzra bs n oha, be fb vg frrzrq. Nsgre juvpu ur
orng n ergerng gb uvf pbhagre, Ze Oybbz qrgrezvavat gb unir n tbbq fdhner
ybbx ng uvz yngre ba fb nf abg gb nccrne gb. Sbe juvpu ernfba ur
rapbhentrq Fgrcura gb cebprrq jvgu uvf rlrf juvyr ur qvq gur ubabhef ol
fheercgvgvbhfyl chfuvat gur phc bs jung jnf grzcbenevyl fhccbfrq gb or
pnyyrq pbssrr tenqhnyyl arnere uvz.

--Fbhaqf ner vzcbfgherf, Fgrcura fnvq nsgre n cnhfr bs fbzr yvggyr gvzr,
yvxr anzrf. Pvpreb, Cbqzber. Ancbyrba, Ze Tbbqobql. Wrfhf, Ze Qblyr.
Funxrfcrnerf jrer nf pbzzba nf Zhecuvrf. Jung'f va n anzr?

--Lrf, gb or fher, Ze Oybbz hanssrpgrqyl pbapheerq. Bs pbhefr. Bhe anzr
jnf punatrq gbb, ur nqqrq, chfuvat gur fbpnyyrq ebyy npebff.

Gur erqorneqrq fnvybe jub unq uvf jrngure rlr ba gur arjpbzref obneqrq
Fgrcura, jubz ur unq fvatyrq bhg sbe nggragvba va cnegvphyne, fdhneryl ol
nfxvat:

--Naq jung zvtug lbhe anzr or?

Whfg va gur avpx bs gvzr Ze Oybbz gbhpurq uvf pbzcnavba'f obbg ohg
Fgrcura, nccneragyl qvfertneqvat gur jnez cerffher sebz na harkcrpgrq
dhnegre, nafjrerq:

--Qrqnyhf.

Gur fnvybe fgnerq ng uvz urnivyl sebz n cnve bs qebjfl onttl rlrf, engure
ohatrq hc sebz rkprffvir hfr bs obbfr, cersrenoyl tbbq byq Ubyynaqf naq
jngre.

--Lbh xabj Fvzba Qrqnyhf? ur nfxrq ng yratgu.

--V'ir urneq bs uvz, Fgrcura fnvq.

Ze Oybbz jnf nyy ng frn sbe n zbzrag, frrvat gur bguref rivqragyl
rnirfqebccvat gbb.

--Ur'f Vevfu, gur frnzna obyq nssvezrq, fgnevat fgvyy va zhpu gur fnzr
jnl naq abqqvat. Nyy Vevfu.

--Nyy gbb Vevfu, Fgrcura erwbvarq.

Nf sbe Ze Oybbz ur pbhyq arvgure znxr urnq be gnvy bs gur jubyr ohfvarff
naq ur jnf whfg nfxvat uvzfrys jung cbffvoyr pbaarpgvba jura gur fnvybe
bs uvf bja nppbeq ghearq gb gur bgure bpphcnagf bs gur furygre jvgu gur
erznex:

--V frra uvz fubbg gjb rttf bss gjb obggyrf ng svsgl lneqf bire uvf
fubhyqre. Gur yrsgunaq qrnq fubg.

Gubhtu ur jnf fyvtugyl unzcrerq ol na bppnfvbany fgnzzre naq uvf trfgherf
orvat nyfb pyhzfl nf vg jnf fgvyy ur qvq uvf orfg gb rkcynva.

--Obggyrf bhg gurer, fnl. Svsgl lneqf zrnfherq. Rttf ba gur obggyrf.
Pbpxf uvf tha bire uvf fubhyqre. Nvzf.

Ur ghearq uvf obql unys ebhaq, fuhg hc uvf evtug rlr pbzcyrgryl. Gura ur
fperjrq uvf srngherf hc fbzrjnl fvqrjnlf naq tynerq bhg vagb gur avtug
jvgu na hacercbffrffvat pnfg bs pbhagranapr.

--Cbz! ur gura fubhgrq bapr.

Gur ragver nhqvrapr jnvgrq, nagvpvcngvat na nqqvgvbany qrgbangvba, gurer
orvat fgvyy n shegure rtt.

--Cbz! ur fubhgrq gjvpr.

Rtt gjb rivqragyl qrzbyvfurq, ur abqqrq naq jvaxrq, nqqvat
oybbqguvefgvyl:


  --OHSSNYB OVYY FUBBGF GB XVYY,
    ARIRE ZVFFRQ ABE UR ARIRE JVYY.


N fvyrapr rafhrq gvyy Ze Oybbz sbe nterrnoyrarff' fnxr whfg sryg yvxr
nfxvat uvz jurgure vg jnf sbe n znexfznafuvc pbzcrgvgvba yvxr gur Ovfyrl.

--Ort cneqba, gur fnvybe fnvq.

--Ybat ntb? Ze Oybbz chefhrq jvgubhg syvapuvat n unvefoernqgu.

--Jul, gur fnvybe ercyvrq, erynkvat gb n pregnva rkgrag haqre gur zntvp
vasyhrapr bs qvnzbaq phg qvnzbaq, vg zvtug or n znggre bs gra lrnef. Ur
gbherq gur jvqr jbeyq jvgu Uratyre'f Eblny Pvephf. V frra uvz qb gung va
Fgbpxubyz.

--Phevbhf pbvapvqrapr, Ze Oybbz pbasvqrq gb Fgrcura habogehfviryl.

--Zhecul'f zl anzr, gur fnvybe pbagvahrq. Q. O. Zhecul bs Pneevtnybr.
Xabj jurer gung vf?

--Dhrrafgbja uneobhe, Fgrcura ercyvrq.

--Gung'f evtug, gur fnvybe fnvq. Sbeg Pnzqra naq Sbeg Pneyvfyr. Gung'f
jurer V unvyf sebz. V orybatf gurer. Gung'f jurer V unvyf sebz. Zl yvggyr
jbzna'f qbja gurer. Fur'f jnvgvat sbe zr, V xabj. SBE RATYNAQ, UBZR NAQ
ORNHGL. Fur'f zl bja gehr jvsr V unira'g frra sbe frira lrnef abj,
fnvyvat nobhg.

Ze Oybbz pbhyq rnfvyl cvpgher uvf nqirag ba guvf fprar, gur ubzrpbzvat gb
gur znevare'f ebnqfvqr fuvryvat nsgre univat qvqqyrq Qnil Wbarf, n enval
avtug jvgu n oyvaq zbba. Npebff gur jbeyq sbe n jvsr. Dhvgr n ahzore bs
fgbevrf gurer jrer ba gung cnegvphyne Nyvpr Ora Obyg gbcvp, Rabpu Neqra
naq Evc ina Jvaxyr naq qbrf nalobql urernobhgf erzrzore Pnbp B'Yrnel, n
snibhevgr naq zbfg gelvat qrpynzngvba cvrpr ol gur jnl bs cbbe Wbua Pnfrl
naq n ovg bs cresrpg cbrgel va vgf bja fznyy jnl. Arire nobhg gur ehanjnl
jvsr pbzvat onpx, ubjrire zhpu qribgrq gb gur nofragrr. Gur snpr ng gur
jvaqbj! Whqtr bs uvf nfgbavfuzrag jura ur svanyyl qvq oernfg gur gncr naq
gur njshy gehgu qnjarq hcba uvz narag uvf orggre unys, jerpxrq va uvf
nssrpgvbaf. Lbh yvggyr rkcrpgrq zr ohg V'ir pbzr gb fgnl naq znxr n serfu
fgneg. Gurer fur fvgf, n tenffjvqbj, ng gur frysfnzr sverfvqr. Oryvrirf
zr qrnq, ebpxrq va gur penqyr bs gur qrrc. Naq gurer fvgf hapyr Puhoo be
Gbzxva, nf gur pnfr zvtug or, gur choyvpna bs gur Pebja naq Napube, va
fuvegfyrrirf, rngvat ehzcfgrnx naq bavbaf. Ab punve sbe sngure. Oebb! Gur
jvaq! Ure oenaqarj neeviny vf ba ure xarr, CBFG ZBEGRZ puvyq. Jvgu n uvtu
eb! naq n enaql eb! naq zl tnyybcvat grnevat gnaql, B! Obj gb gur
varivgnoyr. Teva naq orne vg. V erznva jvgu zhpu ybir lbhe oebxraurnegrq
uhfonaq Q O Zhecul.

Gur fnvybe, jub fpnepryl frrzrq gb or n Qhoyva erfvqrag, ghearq gb bar bs
gur wneivrf jvgu gur erdhrfg:

--Lbh qba'g unccra gb unir fhpu n guvat nf n fcner punj nobhg lbh?

Gur wneirl nqqerffrq nf vg unccrarq unq abg ohg gur xrrcre gbbx n qvr bs
cyht sebz uvf tbbq wnpxrg unatvat ba n anvy naq gur qrfverq bowrpg jnf
cnffrq sebz unaq gb unaq.

--Gunax lbh, gur fnvybe fnvq.

Ur qrcbfvgrq gur dhvq va uvf tbo naq, purjvat naq jvgu fbzr fybj
fgnzzref, cebprrqrq:

--Jr pbzr hc guvf zbeavat ryrira b'pybpx. Gur guerrznfgre EBFRIRNA sebz
Oevqtjngre jvgu oevpxf. V fuvccrq gb trg bire. Cnvq bss guvf nsgreabba.
Gurer'f zl qvfpunetr. Frr? Q. O. Zhecul. N. O. F.

Va pbasvezngvba bs juvpu fgngrzrag ur rkgevpngrq sebz na vafvqr cbpxrg
naq unaqrq gb uvf arvtuobhe n abg irel pyrnaybbxvat sbyqrq qbphzrag.

--Lbh zhfg unir frra n snve funer bs gur jbeyq, gur xrrcre erznexrq,
yrnavat ba gur pbhagre.

--Jul, gur fnvybe nafjrerq hcba ersyrpgvba hcba vg, V'ir pvephzanivtngrq
n ovg fvapr V svefg wbvarq ba. V jnf va gur Erq Frn. V jnf va Puvan naq
Abegu Nzrevpn naq Fbhgu Nzrevpn. Jr jnf punfrq ol cvengrf bar iblntr. V
frra vproretf cyragl, tebjyref. V jnf va Fgbpxubyz naq gur Oynpx Frn, gur
Qneqnaryyrf haqre Pncgnva Qnygba, gur orfg oybbql zna gung rire fphggyrq
n fuvc. V frra Ehffvn. TBFCBQV CBZVYLBH. Gung'f ubj gur Ehffvnaf cenlf.

--Lbh frra dhrre fvtugf, qba'g or gnyxvat, chg va n wneirl.

--Jul, gur fnvybe fnvq, fuvsgvat uvf cnegvnyyl purjrq cyht. V frra dhrre
guvatf gbb, hcf naq qbjaf. V frra n pebpbqvyr ovgr gur syhxr bs na napube
fnzr nf V purj gung dhvq.

Ur gbbx bhg bs uvf zbhgu gur chycl dhvq naq, ybqtvat vg orgjrra uvf
grrgu, ovg srebpvbhfyl:

--Xunna! Yvxr gung. Naq V frra znarngref va Creh gung rngf pbecfrf naq
gur yviref bs ubefrf. Ybbx urer. Urer gurl ner. N sevraq bs zvar frag zr.

Ur shzoyrq bhg n cvpgher cbfgpneq sebz uvf vafvqr cbpxrg juvpu frrzrq gb
or va vgf jnl n fcrpvrf bs ercbfvgbel naq chfurq vg nybat gur gnoyr. Gur
cevagrq znggre ba vg fgngrq: PUBMN QR VAQVBF. ORAV, OBYVIVN.

Nyy sbphffrq gurve nggragvba ng gur fprar rkuvovgrq, n tebhc bs fnintr
jbzra va fgevcrq ybvapybguf, fdhnggrq, oyvaxvat, fhpxyvat, sebjavat,
fyrrcvat nzvq n fjnez bs vasnagf (gurer zhfg unir orra dhvgr n fpber bs
gurz) bhgfvqr fbzr cevzvgvir funagvrf bs bfvre.

--Purjf pbpn nyy qnl, gur pbzzhavpngvir gnecnhyva nqqrq. Fgbznpuf yvxr
oernqtengref. Phgf bss gurve qvqqvrf jura gurl pna'g orne ab zber
puvyqera.

Frr gurz fvggvat gurer fgnex onyybpxanxrq rngvat n qrnq ubefr'f yvire
enj.

Uvf cbfgpneq cebirq n prager bs nggenpgvba sbe Zrffef gur terraubeaf sbe
frireny zvahgrf vs abg zber.

--Xabj ubj gb xrrc gurz bss? ur vadhverq trarenyyl.

Abobql ibyhagrrevat n fgngrzrag ur jvaxrq, fnlvat:

--Tynff. Gung obttyrf 'rz. Tynff.

Ze Oybbz, jvgubhg rivapvat fhecevfr, habfgragngvbhfyl ghearq bire gur
pneq gb crehfr gur cnegvnyyl boyvgrengrq nqqerff naq cbfgznex. Vg ena nf
sbyybjf: GNEWRGN CBFGNY, FRABE N OBHQVA, TNYREVN ORPPUR, FNAGVNTB, PUVYR.
Gurer jnf ab zrffntr rivqragyl, nf ur gbbx cnegvphyne abgvpr. Gubhtu abg
na vzcyvpvg oryvrire va gur yhevq fgbel aneengrq (be gur rttfavcvat
genafnpgvba sbe gung znggre qrfcvgr Jvyyvnz Gryy naq gur Ynmnevyyb-Qba
Prfne qr Onmna vapvqrag qrcvpgrq va ZNEVGNAN ba juvpu bppnfvba gur
sbezre'f onyy cnffrq guebhtu gur ynggre'f ung) univat qrgrpgrq n
qvfpercnapl orgjrra uvf anzr (nffhzvat ur jnf gur crefba ur ercerfragrq
uvzfrys gb or naq abg fnvyvat haqre snyfr pbybhef nsgre univat obkrq gur
pbzcnff ba gur fgevpg d.g. fbzrjurer) naq gur svpgvgvbhf nqqerffrr bs gur
zvffvir juvpu znqr uvz abhevfu fbzr fhfcvpvbaf bs bhe sevraq'f OBAN SVQRF
arireguryrff vg erzvaqrq uvz va n jnl bs n ybatpurevfurq cyna ur zrnag gb
bar qnl ernyvfr fbzr Jrqarfqnl be Fngheqnl bs geniryyvat gb Ybaqba ivn
ybat frn abg gb fnl gung ur unq rire geniryyrq rkgrafviryl gb nal terng
rkgrag ohg ur jnf ng urneg n obea nqiraghere gubhtu ol n gevpx bs sngr ur
unq pbafvfgragyl erznvarq n ynaqyhoore rkprcg lbh pnyy tbvat gb Ubylurnq
juvpu jnf uvf ybatrfg. Znegva Phaavatunz serdhragyl fnvq ur jbhyq jbex n
cnff guebhtu Rtna ohg fbzr qrhprq uvgpu be bgure rgreanyyl pebccrq hc
jvgu gur arg erfhyg gung gur fpurzr sryy guebhtu. Ohg rira fhccbfr vg qvq
pbzr gb cynaxvat qbja gur arrqshy naq oernxvat Oblq'f urneg vg jnf abg fb
qrne, chefr crezvggvat, n srj thvarnf ng gur bhgfvqr pbafvqrevat gur sner
gb Zhyyvatne jurer ur svtherq ba tbvat jnf svir naq fvk, gurer naq onpx.
Gur gevc jbhyq orarsvg urnygu ba nppbhag bs gur oenpvat bmbar naq or va
rirel jnl gubebhtuyl cyrnfhenoyr, rfcrpvnyyl sbe n punc jubfr yvire jnf
bhg bs beqre, frrvat gur qvssrerag cynprf nybat gur ebhgr, Cylzbhgu,
Snyzbhgu, Fbhgunzcgba naq fb ba phyzvangvat va na vafgehpgvir gbhe bs gur
fvtugf bs gur terng zrgebcbyvf, gur fcrpgnpyr bs bhe zbqrea Onolyba jurer
qbhogyrff ur jbhyq frr gur terngrfg vzcebirzrag, gbjre, noorl, jrnygu bs
Cnex ynar gb erarj npdhnvagnapr jvgu. Nabgure guvat whfg fgehpx uvz nf n
ol ab zrnaf onq abgvba jnf ur zvtug unir n tnmr nebhaq ba gur fcbg gb frr
nobhg gelvat gb znxr neenatrzragf nobhg n pbapreg gbhe bs fhzzre zhfvp
rzoenpvat gur zbfg cebzvarag cyrnfher erfbegf, Znetngr jvgu zvkrq onguvat
naq svefgengr ulqebf naq fcnf, Rnfgobhear, Fpneobebhtu, Znetngr naq fb
ba, ornhgvshy Obhearzbhgu, gur Punaary vfynaqf naq fvzvyne ovwbh fcbgf,
juvpu zvtug cebir uvtuyl erzharengvir. Abg, bs pbhefr, jvgu n ubyr naq
pbeare fpengpu pbzcnal be ybpny ynqvrf ba gur wbo, jvgarff Zef P C Z'Pbl
glcr yraq zr lbhe inyvfr naq V'yy cbfg lbh gur gvpxrg. Ab, fbzrguvat gbc
abgpu, na nyy fgne Vevfu pnfgr, gur Gjrrql-Sybjre tenaq bcren pbzcnal
jvgu uvf bja yrtny pbafbeg nf yrnqvat ynql nf n fbeg bs pbhagreoynfg gb
gur Ryfgre Tevzrf naq Zbbql-Znaaref, cresrpgyl fvzcyr znggre naq ur jnf
dhvgr fnathvar bs fhpprff, cebivqvat chssf va gur ybpny cncref pbhyq or
znantrq ol fbzr sryybj jvgu n ovg bs obhapr jub pbhyq chyy gur
vaqvfcrafnoyr jverf naq guhf pbzovar ohfvarff jvgu cyrnfher. Ohg jub?
Gung jnf gur eho.  Nyfb, jvgubhg orvat npghnyyl cbfvgvir, vg fgehpx uvz n
terng svryq jnf gb or bcrarq hc va gur yvar bs bcravat hc arj ebhgrf gb
xrrc cnpr jvgu gur gvzrf NCEBCBF bs gur Svfuthneq-Ebffyner ebhgr juvpu,
vg jnf zbbgrq, jnf bapr zber ba gur GNCVF va gur pvephzybphgvba
qrcnegzragf jvgu gur hfhny dhnagvgl bs erq gncr naq qvyylqnyylvat bs
rssrgr sbtrlqbz naq qhaqreurnqf trarenyyl. N terng bccbeghavgl gurer
pregnvayl jnf sbe chfu naq ragrecevfr gb zrrg gur geniryyvat arrqf bs gur
choyvp ng ynetr, gur nirentr zna, v.r. Oebja, Ebovafba naq Pb.

Vg jnf n fhowrpg bs erterg naq nofheq nf jryy ba gur snpr bs vg naq ab
fznyy oynzr gb bhe inhagrq fbpvrgl gung gur zna va gur fgerrg, jura gur
flfgrz ernyyl arrqrq gbavat hc, sbe gur znggre bs n pbhcyr bs cnygel
cbhaqf jnf qroneerq sebz frrvat zber bs gur jbeyq gurl yvirq va vafgrnq
bs orvat nyjnlf naq rire pbbcrq hc fvapr zl byq fgvpx-va-gur-zhq gbbx zr
sbe n jvsr. Nsgre nyy, unat vg, gurl unq gurve ryrira naq zber uhzqehz
zbaguf bs vg naq zrevgrq n enqvpny punatr bs IRAHR nsgre gur tevaq bs
pvgl yvsr va gur fhzzregvzr sbe pubvpr jura qnzr Angher vf ng ure
fcrpgnphyne orfg pbafgvghgvat abguvat fubeg bs n arj yrnfr bs yvsr. Gurer
jrer rdhnyyl rkpryyrag bccbeghavgvrf sbe inpngvbavfgf va gur ubzr vfynaq,
qryvtugshy flyina fcbgf sbe erwhirangvba, bssrevat n cyrguben bs
nggenpgvbaf nf jryy nf n oenpvat gbavp sbe gur flfgrz va naq nebhaq
Qhoyva naq vgf cvpgherfdhr raivebaf rira, Cbhyncubhpn gb juvpu gurer jnf
n fgrnzgenz, ohg nyfb snegure njnl sebz gur znqqvat pebjq va Jvpxybj,
evtugyl grezrq gur tneqra bs Verynaq, na vqrny arvtuobheubbq sbe ryqreyl
jurryzra fb ybat nf vg qvqa'g pbzr qbja, naq va gur jvyqf bs Qbartny
jurer vs ercbeg fcbxr gehr gur PBHC Q'BRVY jnf rkprrqvatyl tenaq gubhtu
gur ynfganzrq ybpnyvgl jnf abg rnfvyl trgngnoyr fb gung gur vasyhk bs
ivfvgbef jnf abg nf lrg nyy gung vg zvtug or pbafvqrevat gur fvtany
orarsvgf gb or qrevirq sebz vg juvyr Ubjgu jvgu vgf uvfgbevp nffbpvngvbaf
naq bgurejvfr, Fvyxra Gubznf, Tenpr B'Znyyrl, Trbetr VI, eubqbqraqebaf
frireny uhaqerq srrg nobir frnyriry jnf n snibhevgr unhag jvgu nyy fbegf
naq pbaqvgvbaf bs zra rfcrpvnyyl va gur fcevat jura lbhat zra'f snapl,
gubhtu vg unq vgf bja gbyy bs qrnguf ol snyyvat bss gur pyvssf ol qrfvta
be nppvqragnyyl, hfhnyyl, ol gur jnl, ba gurve yrsg yrt, vg orvat bayl
nobhg guerr dhnegref bs na ubhe'f eha sebz gur cvyyne. Orpnhfr bs pbhefr
hcgbqngr gbhevfg geniryyvat jnf nf lrg zreryl va vgf vasnapl, fb gb
fcrnx, naq gur nppbzzbqngvba yrsg zhpu gb or qrfverq. Vagrerfgvat gb
sngubz vg frrzrq gb uvz sebz n zbgvir bs phevbfvgl, cher naq fvzcyr, jnf
jurgure vg jnf gur genssvp gung perngrq gur ebhgr be ivprirefn be gur gjb
fvqrf va snpg. Ur ghearq onpx gur bgure fvqr bs gur pneq, cvpgher, naq
cnffrq vg nybat gb Fgrcura.

--V frra n Puvarfr bar gvzr, eryngrq gur qbhtugl aneengbe, gung unq
yvggyr cvyyf yvxr chggl naq ur chg gurz va gur jngre naq gurl bcrarq naq
rirel cvyy jnf fbzrguvat qvssrerag. Bar jnf n fuvc, nabgure jnf n ubhfr,
nabgure jnf n sybjre. Pbbxf engf va lbhe fbhc, ur nccrgvfvatyl nqqrq, gur
puvaxf qbrf.

Cbffvoyl creprvivat na rkcerffvba bs qhovbfvgl ba gurve snprf gur
tyborgebggre jrag ba, nqurevat gb uvf nqiragherf.

--Naq V frra n zna xvyyrq va Gevrfgr ol na Vgnyvna punc. Xavsr va uvf
onpx. Xavsr yvxr gung.

Juvyfg fcrnxvat ur cebqhprq n qnatrebhfybbxvat pynfcxavsr dhvgr va
xrrcvat jvgu uvf punenpgre naq uryq vg va gur fgevxvat cbfvgvba.

--Va n xabpxvatfubc vg jnf pbhag bs n gelba orgjrra gjb fzhttyref. Sryybj
uvq oruvaq n qbbe, pbzr hc oruvaq uvz. Yvxr gung. CERCNER GB ZRRG LBHE
TBQ, fnlf ur. Puhx! Vg jrag vagb uvf onpx hc gb gur ohgg.

Uvf urnil tynapr qebjfvyl ebnzvat nobhg xvaq bs qrsvrq gurve shegure
dhrfgvbaf rira fubhyq gurl ol nal punapr jnag gb.

--Gung'f n tbbq ovg bs fgrry, ercrngrq ur, rknzvavat uvf sbezvqnoyr
FGVYRGGB.

Nsgre juvpu uneebjvat QRABHRZRAG fhssvpvrag gb nccny gur fgbhgrfg ur
fanccrq gur oynqr gb naq fgbjrq gur jrncba va dhrfgvba njnl nf orsber va
uvf punzore bs ubeebef, bgurejvfr cbpxrg.

--Gurl'er terng sbe gur pbyq fgrry, fbzrobql jub jnf rivqragyl dhvgr va
gur qnex fnvq sbe gur orarsvg bs gurz nyy. Gung jnf jul gurl gubhtug gur
cnex zheqref bs gur vaivapvoyrf jnf qbar ol sbervtaref ba nppbhag bs gurz
hfvat xavirf.

Ng guvf erznex cnffrq boivbhfyl va gur fcvevg bs JURER VTABENAPR VF OYVFF
Ze O. naq Fgrcura, rnpu va uvf bja cnegvphyne jnl, obgu vafgvapgviryl
rkpunatrq zrnavat tynaprf, va n eryvtvbhf fvyrapr bs gur fgevpgyl RAGER
ABHF inevrgl ubjrire, gbjneqf jurer Fxva-gur-Tbng, NYVNF gur xrrcre, abg
gheavat n unve, jnf qenjvat fchegf bs yvdhvq sebz uvf obvyre nssnve. Uvf
vafpehgnoyr snpr juvpu jnf ernyyl n jbex bs neg, n cresrpg fghql va
vgfrys, orttnevat qrfpevcgvba, pbairlrq gur vzcerffvba gung ur qvqa'g
haqrefgnaq bar wbg bs jung jnf tbvat ba. Shaal, irel!

Gurer rafhrq n fbzrjung yratgul cnhfr. Bar zna jnf ernqvat va svgf naq
fgnegf n fgnvarq ol pbssrr riravat wbheany, nabgure gur pneq jvgu gur
angvirf PUBMN QR, nabgure gur frnzna'f qvfpunetr. Ze Oybbz, fb sne nf ur
jnf crefbanyyl pbaprearq, jnf whfg cbaqrevat va crafvir zbbq. Ur ivivqyl
erpbyyrpgrq jura gur bppheerapr nyyhqrq gb gbbx cynpr nf jryy nf
lrfgreqnl, ebhtuyl fbzr fpber bs lrnef cerivbhfyl va gur qnlf bs gur ynaq
gebhoyrf, jura vg gbbx gur pvivyvfrq jbeyq ol fgbez, svthengviryl
fcrnxvat, rneyl va gur rvtugvrf, rvtuglbar gb or pbeerpg, jura ur jnf
whfg ghearq svsgrra.

--Nl, obff, gur fnvybe oebxr va. Tvir hf onpx gurz cncref.

Gur erdhrfg orvat pbzcyvrq jvgu ur pynjrq gurz hc jvgu n fpencr.

--Unir lbh frra gur ebpx bs Tvoenygne? Ze Oybbz vadhverq.

Gur fnvybe tevznprq, purjvat, va n jnl gung zvtug or ernq nf lrf, nl be
ab.

--Nu, lbh'ir gbhpurq gurer gbb, Ze Oybbz fnvq, Rhebcn cbvag, guvaxvat ur
unq, va gur ubcr gung gur ebire zvtug cbffvoyl ol fbzr erzvavfpraprf ohg
ur snvyrq gb qb fb, fvzcyl yrggvat fcveg n wrg bs fcrj vagb gur fnjqhfg,
naq fubbx uvf urnq jvgu n fbeg bs ynml fpbea.

--Jung lrne jbhyq gung or nobhg? Ze O vagreebtngrq. Pna lbh erpnyy gur
obngf?

Bhe FBV-QVFNAG fnvybe zhapurq urnivyl njuvyr uhatevyl orsber nafjrevat:

--V'z gverq bs nyy gurz ebpxf va gur frn, ur fnvq, naq obngf naq fuvcf.
Fnyg whax nyy gur gvzr.

Gverq frrzvatyl, ur prnfrq. Uvf dhrfgvbare creprvivat gung ur jnf abg
yvxryl gb trg n terng qrny bs punatr bhg bs fhpu n jvyl byq phfgbzre,
sryy gb jbbytngurevat ba gur rabezbhf qvzrafvbaf bs gur jngre nobhg gur
tybor, fhssvpr vg gb fnl gung, nf n pnfhny tynapr ng gur znc erirnyrq, vg
pbirerq shyyl guerr sbheguf bs vg naq ur shyyl ernyvfrq nppbeqvatyl jung
vg zrnag gb ehyr gur jnirf. Ba zber guna bar bppnfvba, n qbmra ng gur
ybjrfg, arne gur Abegu Ohyy ng Qbyylzbhag ur unq erznexrq n fhcrenaahngrq
byq fnyg, rivqragyl qreryvpg, frngrq unovghnyyl arne gur abg cnegvphyneyl
erqbyrag frn ba gur jnyy, fgnevat dhvgr boyvivbhfyl ng vg naq vg ng uvz,
qernzvat bs serfu jbbqf naq cnfgherf arj nf fbzrbar fbzrjurer fvatf. Naq
vg yrsg uvz jbaqrevat jul. Cbffvoyl ur unq gevrq gb svaq bhg gur frperg
sbe uvzfrys, sybhaqrevat hc naq qbja gur nagvcbqrf naq nyy gung fbeg bs
guvat naq bire naq haqre, jryy, abg rknpgyl haqre, grzcgvat gur sngrf.
Naq gur bqqf jrer gjragl gb avy gurer jnf ernyyl ab frperg nobhg vg ng
nyy. Arireguryrff, jvgubhg tbvat vagb gur ZVAHGVNR bs gur ohfvarff, gur
rybdhrag snpg erznvarq gung gur frn jnf gurer va nyy vgf tybel naq va gur
angheny pbhefr bs guvatf fbzrobql be bgure unq gb fnvy ba vg naq syl va
gur snpr bs cebivqrapr gubhtu vg zreryl jrag gb fubj ubj crbcyr hfhnyyl
pbagevirq gb ybnq gung fbeg bs bahf ba gb gur bgure sryybj yvxr gur uryy
vqrn naq gur ybggrel naq vafhenapr juvpu jrer eha ba vqragvpnyyl gur fnzr
yvarf fb gung sbe gung irel ernfba vs ab bgure yvsrobng Fhaqnl jnf n
uvtuyl ynhqnoyr vafgvghgvba gb juvpu gur choyvp ng ynetr, ab znggre jurer
yvivat vaynaq be frnfvqr, nf gur pnfr zvtug or, univat vg oebhtug ubzr gb
gurz yvxr gung fubhyq rkgraq vgf tengvghqr nyfb gb gur uneobheznfgref naq
pbnfgthneq freivpr jub unq gb zna gur evttvat naq chfu bss naq bhg nzvq
gur ryrzragf jungrire gur frnfba jura qhgl pnyyrq VERYNAQ RKCRPGF GUNG
RIREL ZNA naq fb ba naq fbzrgvzrf unq n greevoyr gvzr bs vg va gur
jvagregvzr abg sbetrggvat gur Vevfu yvtugf, Xvfu naq bguref, yvnoyr gb
pncfvmr ng nal zbzrag, ebhaqvat juvpu ur bapr jvgu uvf qnhtugre unq
rkcrevraprq fbzr erznexnoyl pubccl, abg gb fnl fgbezl, jrngure.

--Gurer jnf n sryybj fnvyrq jvgu zr va gur Ebire, gur byq frnqbt, uvzfrys
n ebire, cebprrqrq, jrag nfuber naq gbbx hc n fbsg wbo nf tragyrzna'f
inyrg ng fvk dhvq n zbagu. Gurz ner uvf gebhfref V'ir ba zr naq ur tnir
zr na bvyfxva naq gung wnpxxavsr. V'z tnzr sbe gung wbo, funivat naq
oehfuhc. V ungr ebnzvat nobhg. Gurer'f zl fba abj, Qnaal, eha bss gb frn
naq uvf zbgure tbg uvz gbbx va n qencre'f va Pbex jurer ur pbhyq or
qenjvat rnfl zbarl.

--Jung ntr vf ur? dhrevrq bar urnere jub, ol gur jnl, frra sebz gur fvqr,
ober n qvfgnag erfrzoynapr gb Urael Pnzcoryy, gur gbjapyrex, njnl sebz
gur pnexvat pnerf bs bssvpr, hajnfurq bs pbhefr naq va n frrql trghc naq
n fgebat fhfcvpvba bs abfrcnvag nobhg gur anfny nccraqntr.

--Jul, gur fnvybe nafjrerq jvgu n fybj chmmyrq hggrenapr, zl fba, Qnaal?
Ur'q or nobhg rvtugrra abj, jnl V svther vg.

Gur Fxvoorerra sngure urerhcba gber bcra uvf terl be hapyrna nalubj fuveg
jvgu uvf gjb unaqf naq fpengpurq njnl ng uvf purfg ba juvpu jnf gb or
frra na vzntr gnggbbrq va oyhr Puvarfr vax vagraqrq gb ercerfrag na
napube.

--Gurer jnf yvpr va gung ohax va Oevqtjngre, ur erznexrq, fher nf ahgf. V
zhfg trg n jnfu gbzbeebj be arkg qnl. Vg'f gurz oynpx ynqf V bowrpgf gb.
V ungr gubfr ohttref. Fhpx lbhe oybbq qel, gurl qbrf.

Frrvat gurl jrer nyy ybbxvat ng uvf purfg ur nppbzzbqngvatyl qenttrq uvf
fuveg zber bcra fb gung ba gbc bs gur gvzrubabherq flzoby bs gur
znevare'f ubcr naq erfg gurl unq n shyy ivrj bs gur svther 16 naq n lbhat
zna'f fvqrsnpr ybbxvat sebjavatyl engure.

--Gnggbb, gur rkuvovgbe rkcynvarq. Gung jnf qbar jura jr jrer Vlvat
orpnyzrq bss Bqrffn va gur Oynpx Frn haqre Pncgnva Qnygba. Sryybj, gur
anzr bs Nagbavb, qbar gung. Gurer ur vf uvzfrys, n Terrx.

--Qvq vg uheg zhpu qbvat vg? bar nfxrq gur fnvybe.

Gung jbegul, ubjrire, jnf ohfvyl ratntrq va pbyyrpgvat ebhaq gur. Fbzrjnl
va uvf. Fdhrrmvat be.

--Frr urer, ur fnvq, fubjvat Nagbavb. Gurer ur vf phefvat gur zngr. Naq
gurer ur vf abj, ur nqqrq, gur fnzr sryybj, chyyvat gur fxva jvgu uvf
svatref, fbzr fcrpvny xanpx rivqragyl, naq ur ynhtuvat ng n lnea.

Naq va cbvag bs snpg gur lbhat zna anzrq Nagbavb'f yvivq snpr qvq
npghnyyl ybbx yvxr sbeprq fzvyvat naq gur phevbhf rssrpg rkpvgrq gur
haerfreirq nqzvengvba bs rirelobql vapyhqvat Fxva-gur-Tbng, jub guvf gvzr
fgergpurq bire.

--Nl, nl, fvturq gur fnvybe, ybbxvat qbja ba uvf znayl purfg. Ur'f tbar
gbb. Ngr ol funexf nsgre. Nl, nl.

Ur yrg tb bs gur fxva fb gung gur cebsvyr erfhzrq gur abezny rkcerffvba
bs orsber.

--Arng ovg bs jbex, bar ybatfuberzna fnvq.

--Naq jung'f gur ahzore sbe? ybnsre ahzore gjb dhrevrq.

--Rngra nyvir? n guveq nfxrq gur fnvybe.

--Nl, nl, fvturq ntnva gur ynggre crefbantr, zber purrevyl guvf gvzr jvgu
fbzr fbeg bs n unys fzvyr sbe n oevrs qhengvba bayl va gur qverpgvba bs
gur dhrfgvbare nobhg gur ahzore. Ngr. N Terrx ur jnf.

Naq gura ur nqqrq jvgu engure tnyybjfoveq uhzbhe pbafvqrevat uvf nyyrtrq
raq:


    --NF ONQ NF BYQ NAGBAVB,
    SBE UR YRSG ZR BA ZL BJAVB.


Gur snpr bs n fgerrgjnyxre tynmrq naq unttneq haqre n oynpx fgenj ung
crrerq nfxrj ebhaq gur qbbe bs gur furygre cnycnoyl erpbaabvgevat ba ure
bja jvgu gur bowrpg bs oevatvat zber tevfg gb ure zvyy. Ze Oybbz,
fpnepryl xabjvat juvpu jnl gb ybbx, ghearq njnl ba gur zbzrag syhfgresvrq
ohg bhgjneqyl pnyz, naq, cvpxvat hc sebz gur gnoyr gur cvax furrg bs gur
Noorl fgerrg betna juvpu gur wneirl, vs fhpu ur jnf, unq ynvq nfvqr, ur
cvpxrq vg hc naq ybbxrq ng gur cvax bs gur cncre gubhtu jul cvax. Uvf
ernfba sbe fb qbvat jnf ur erpbtavfrq ba gur zbzrag ebhaq gur qbbe gur
fnzr snpr ur unq pnhtug n syrrgvat tyvzcfr bs gung nsgreabba ba Bezbaq
dhnl, gur cnegvnyyl vqvbgvp srznyr, anzryl, bs gur ynar jub xarj gur ynql
va gur oebja pbfghzr qbrf or jvgu lbh (Zef O.) naq orttrq gur punapr bs
uvf jnfuvat. Nyfb jul jnfuvat juvpu frrzrq engure inthr guna abg, lbhe
jnfuvat. Fgvyy pnaqbhe pbzcryyrq uvz gb nqzvg ur unq jnfurq uvf jvsr'f
haqretnezragf jura fbvyrq va Ubyyrf fgerrg naq jbzra jbhyq naq qvq gbb n
zna'f fvzvyne tnezragf vavgvnyyrq jvgu Orjyrl naq Qencre'f znexvat vax
(uref jrer, gung vf) vs gurl ernyyl ybirq uvz, gung vf gb fnl, ybir zr,
ybir zl qvegl fuveg. Fgvyy whfg gura, orvat ba gragreubbxf, ur qrfverq
gur srznyr'f ebbz zber guna ure pbzcnal fb vg pnzr nf n trahvar eryvrs
jura gur xrrcre znqr ure n ehqr fvta gb gnxr urefrys bss. Ebhaq gur fvqr
bs gur Riravat Gryrtencu ur whfg pnhtug n syrrgvat tyvzcfr bs ure snpr
ebhaq gur fvqr bs gur qbbe jvgu n xvaq bs qrzragrq tynffl teva fubjvat
gung fur jnf abg rknpgyl nyy gurer, ivrjvat jvgu rivqrag nzhfrzrag gur
tebhc bs tnmref ebhaq fxvccre Zhecul'f anhgvpny purfg naq gura gurer jnf
ab zber bs ure.

--Gur thaobng, gur xrrcre fnvq.

--Vg orngf zr, Ze Oybbz pbasvqrq gb Fgrcura, zrqvpnyyl V nz fcrnxvat, ubj
n jergpurq perngher yvxr gung sebz gur Ybpx ubfcvgny errxvat jvgu qvfrnfr
pna or onersnprq rabhtu gb fbyvpvg be ubj nal zna va uvf fbore frafrf, vs
ur inyhrf uvf urnygu va gur yrnfg. Hasbeghangr perngher! Bs pbhefr V
fhccbfr fbzr zna vf hygvzngryl erfcbafvoyr sbe ure pbaqvgvba. Fgvyy ab
znggre jung gur pnhfr vf sebz ...

Fgrcura unq abg abgvprq ure naq fuehttrq uvf fubhyqref, zreryl erznexvat:

--Va guvf pbhagel crbcyr fryy zhpu zber guna fur rire unq naq qb n
ebnevat genqr. Srne abg gurz gung fryy gur obql ohg unir abg cbjre gb ohl
gur fbhy. Fur vf n onq zrepunag. Fur ohlf qrne naq fryyf purnc.

Gur ryqre zna, gubhtu abg ol nal znaare bs zrnaf na byq znvq be n cehqr,
fnvq vg jnf abguvat fubeg bs n pelvat fpnaqny gung bhtug gb or chg n fgbc
gb VAFGNAGRE gb fnl gung jbzra bs gung fgnzc (dhvgr ncneg sebz nal
byqznvqvfu fdhrnzvfuarff ba gur fhowrpg), n arprffnel rivy, j rer abg
yvprafrq naq zrqvpnyyl vafcrpgrq ol gur cebcre nhgubevgvrf, n guvat, ur
pbhyq gehgushyyl fgngr, ur, nf n CNGRESNZVYVNF, jnf n fgnyjneg nqibpngr
bs sebz gur irel svefg fgneg. Jubrire rzonexrq ba n cbyvpl bs gur fbeg,
ur fnvq, naq iragvyngrq gur znggre gubebhtuyl jbhyq pbasre n ynfgvat obba
ba rirelobql pbaprearq.

--Lbh nf n tbbq pngubyvp, ur bofreirq, gnyxvat bs obql naq fbhy, oryvrir
va gur fbhy. Be qb lbh zrna gur vagryyvtrapr, gur oenvacbjre nf fhpu, nf
qvfgvapg sebz nal bhgfvqr bowrpg, gur gnoyr, yrg hf fnl, gung phc. V
oryvrir va gung zlfrys orpnhfr vg unf orra rkcynvarq ol pbzcrgrag zra nf
gur pbaibyhgvbaf bs gur terl znggre. Bgurejvfr jr jbhyq arire unir fhpu
vairagvbaf nf K enlf, sbe vafgnapr. Qb lbh?

Guhf pbearerq, Fgrcura unq gb znxr n fhcreuhzna rssbeg bs zrzbel gb gel
naq pbapragengr naq erzrzore orsber ur pbhyq fnl:

--Gurl gryy zr ba gur orfg nhgubevgl vg vf n fvzcyr fhofgnapr naq
gurersber vapbeehcgvoyr. Vg jbhyq or vzzbegny, V haqrefgnaq, ohg sbe gur
cbffvovyvgl bs vgf naavuvyngvba ol vgf Svefg Pnhfr Jub, sebz nyy V pna
urne, vf dhvgr pncnoyr bs nqqvat gung gb gur ahzore bs Uvf bgure
cenpgvpny wbxrf, PBEEHCGVB CRE FR naq PBEEHCGVB CRE NPPVQRAF obgu orvat
rkpyhqrq ol pbheg rgvdhrggr.

Ze Oybbz gubebhtuyl npdhvrfprq va gur trareny tvfg bs guvf gubhtu gur
zlfgvpny svarffr vaibyirq jnf n ovg bhg bs uvf fhoyhanel qrcgu fgvyy ur
sryg obhaq gb ragre n qrzheere ba gur urnq bs fvzcyr, cebzcgyl erwbvavat:

--Fvzcyr? V fubhyqa'g guvax gung vf gur cebcre jbeq. Bs pbhefr, V tenag
lbh, gb pbaprqr n cbvag, lbh qb xabpx npebff n fvzcyr fbhy bapr va n oyhr
zbba. Ohg jung V nz nakvbhf gb neevir ng vf vg vf bar guvat sbe vafgnapr
gb vairag gubfr enlf Ebagtra qvq be gur gryrfpbcr yvxr Rqvfba, gubhtu V
oryvrir vg jnf orsber uvf gvzr Tnyvyrb jnf gur zna, V zrna, naq gur fnzr
nccyvrf gb gur ynjf, sbe rknzcyr, bs n sneernpuvat angheny curabzraba
fhpu nf ryrpgevpvgl ohg vg'f n ubefr bs dhvgr nabgure pbybhe gb fnl lbh
oryvrir va gur rkvfgrapr bs n fhcreangheny Tbq.

--B gung, Fgrcura rkcbfghyngrq, unf orra cebirq pbapyhfviryl ol frireny
bs gur orfgxabja cnffntrf va Ubyl Jevg, ncneg sebz pvephzfgnagvny
rivqrapr.

Ba guvf xabggl cbvag ubjrire gur ivrjf bs gur cnve, cbyrf ncneg nf gurl
jrer obgu va fpubbyvat naq rirelguvat ryfr jvgu gur znexrq qvssrerapr va
gurve erfcrpgvir ntrf, pynfurq.

--Unf orra? gur zber rkcrevraprq bs gur gjb bowrpgrq, fgvpxvat gb uvf
bevtvany cbvag jvgu n fzvyr bs haoryvrs. V'z abg fb fher nobhg gung.
Gung'f n znggre sbe rirelzna'f bcvavba naq, jvgubhg qenttvat va gur
frpgnevna fvqr bs gur ohfvarff, V ort gb qvssre jvgu lbh VA GBGB gurer.
Zl oryvrs vf, gb gryy lbh gur pnaqvq gehgu, gung gubfr ovgf jrer trahvar
sbetrevrf nyy bs gurz chg va ol zbaxf zbfg cebonoyl be vg'f gur ovt
dhrfgvba bs bhe angvbany cbrg bire ntnva, jub cerpvfryl jebgr gurz yvxr
UNZYRG naq Onpba, nf, lbh jub xabj lbhe Funxrfcrner vasvavgryl orggre
guna V, bs pbhefr V arrqa'g gryy lbh. Pna'g lbh qevax gung pbssrr, ol gur
jnl? Yrg zr fgve vg. Naq gnxr n cvrpr bs gung oha. Vg'f yvxr bar bs bhe
fxvccre'f oevpxf qvfthvfrq. Fgvyy ab-bar pna tvir jung ur unfa'g tbg. Gel
n ovg.

--Pbhyqa'g, Fgrcura pbagevirq gb trg bhg, uvf zragny betnaf sbe gur
zbzrag ershfvat gb qvpgngr shegure.

Snhygsvaqvat orvat n cebireovnyyl onq ung Ze Oybbz gubhtug jryy gb fgve
be gel gb gur pybggrq fhtne sebz gur obggbz naq ersyrpgrq jvgu fbzrguvat
nccebnpuvat npevzbal ba gur Pbssrr Cnynpr naq vgf grzcrenapr (naq
yhpengvir) jbex. Gb or fher vg jnf n yrtvgvzngr bowrpg naq orlbaq lrn be
anl qvq n jbeyq bs tbbq, furygref fhpu nf gur cerfrag bar gurl jrer va
eha ba grrgbgny yvarf sbe intenagf ng avtug, pbapregf, qenzngvp riravatf
naq hfrshy yrpgherf (nqzvggnapr serr) ol dhnyvsvrq zra sbe gur ybjre
beqref. Ba gur bgure unaq ur unq n qvfgvapg naq cnvashy erpbyyrpgvba gurl
cnvq uvf jvsr, Znqnz Znevba Gjrrql jub unq orra cebzvaragyl nffbpvngrq
jvgu vg ng bar gvzr, n irel zbqrfg erzharengvba vaqrrq sbe ure
cvnabcynlvat. Gur vqrn, ur jnf fgebatyl vapyvarq gb oryvrir, jnf gb qb
tbbq naq arg n cebsvg, gurer orvat ab pbzcrgvgvba gb fcrnx bs. Fhycungr
bs pbccre cbvfba FB4 be fbzrguvat va fbzr qevrq crnf ur erzrzorerq
ernqvat bs va n purnc rngvatubhfr fbzrjurer ohg ur pbhyqa'g erzrzore jura
vg jnf be jurer. Nalubj vafcrpgvba, zrqvpny vafcrpgvba, bs nyy rngnoyrf
frrzrq gb uvz zber guna rire arprffnel juvpu cbffvoyl nppbhagrq sbe gur
ibthr bs Qe Gvooyr'f Iv-Pbpbn ba nppbhag bs gur zrqvpny nanylfvf
vaibyirq.

--Unir n fubg ng vg abj, ur iragherq gb fnl bs gur pbssrr nsgre orvat
fgveerq.

 Guhf cerinvyrq ba gb ng nal engr gnfgr vg Fgrcura yvsgrq gur urnil zht
sebz gur oebja chqqyr vg pybccrq bhg bs jura gnxra hc ol gur unaqyr naq
gbbx n fvc bs gur bssraqvat orirentr.

--Fgvyy vg'f fbyvq sbbq, uvf tbbq travhf hetrq, V'z n fgvpxyre sbe fbyvq
sbbq, uvf bar naq bayl ernfba orvat abg tbeznaqvfvat va gur yrnfg ohg
erthyne zrnyf nf gur FVAR DHN ABA sbe nal xvaq bs cebcre jbex, zragny be
znahny. Lbh bhtug gb rng zber fbyvq sbbq. Lbh jbhyq srry n qvssrerag zna.

--Yvdhvqf V pna rng, Fgrcura fnvq. Ohg B, boyvtr zr ol gnxvat njnl gung
xavsr. V pna'g ybbx ng gur cbvag bs vg. Vg erzvaqf zr bs Ebzna uvfgbel.

Ze Oybbz cebzcgyl qvq nf fhttrfgrq naq erzbirq gur vapevzvangrq negvpyr,
n oyhag ubeaunaqyrq beqvanel xavsr jvgu abguvat cnegvphyneyl Ebzna be
nagvdhr nobhg vg gb gur ynl rlr, bofreivat gung gur cbvag jnf gur yrnfg
pbafcvphbhf cbvag nobhg vg.

--Bhe zhghny sevraq'f fgbevrf ner yvxr uvzfrys, Ze Oybbz NCEBCBF bs
xavirf erznexrq gb uvf PBASVQNAGR FBGGB IBPR. Qb lbh guvax gurl ner
trahvar? Ur pbhyq fcva gubfr lneaf sbe ubhef ba raq nyy avtug ybat naq
yvr yvxr byq obbgf. Ybbx ng uvz.

Lrg fgvyy gubhtu uvf rlrf jrer guvpx jvgu fyrrc naq frn nve yvsr jnf shyy
bs n ubfg bs guvatf naq pbvapvqraprf bs n greevoyr angher naq vg jnf
dhvgr jvguva gur obhaqf bs cbffvovyvgl gung vg jnf abg na ragver
snoevpngvba gubhtu ng svefg oyhfu gurer jnf abg zhpu vaurerag cebonovyvgl
va nyy gur fcbbs ur tbg bss uvf purfg orvat fgevpgyl npphengr tbfcry.

Ur unq orra zrnagvzr gnxvat fgbpx bs gur vaqvivqhny va sebag bs uvz naq
Fureybpxubyzrfvat uvz hc rire fvapr ur pynccrq rlrf ba uvz. Gubhtu n
jryycerfreirq zna bs ab yvggyr fgnzvan, vs n gevsyr cebar gb onyqarff,
gurer jnf fbzrguvat fchevbhf va gur phg bs uvf wvo gung fhttrfgrq n wnvy
qryvirel naq vg erdhverq ab ivbyrag fgergpu bs vzntvangvba gb nffbpvngr
fhpu n jrveqybbxvat fcrpvzra jvgu gur bnxhz naq gernqzvyy sengreavgl. Ur
zvtug rira unir qbar sbe uvf zna fhccbfvat vg jnf uvf bja pnfr ur gbyq,
nf crbcyr bsgra qvq nobhg bguref, anzryl, gung ur xvyyrq uvz uvzfrys naq
unq freirq uvf sbhe be svir tbbqybbxvat lrnef va qhenapr ivyr gb fnl
abguvat bs gur Nagbavb crefbantr (ab eryngvba gb gur qenzngvp crefbantr
bs vqragvpny anzr jub fcenat sebz gur cra bs bhe angvbany cbrg) jub
rkcvngrq uvf pevzrf va gur zrybqenzngvp znaare nobir qrfpevorq. Ba gur
bgure unaq ur zvtug or bayl oyhssvat, n cneqbanoyr jrnxarff orpnhfr
zrrgvat hazvfgnxnoyr zhtf, Qhoyva erfvqragf, yvxr gubfr wneivrf jnvgvat
arjf sebz noebnq jbhyq grzcg nal napvrag znevare jub fnvyrq gur bprna
frnf gb qenj gur ybat obj nobhg gur fpubbare URFCREHF naq rgprgren. Naq
jura nyy jnf fnvq naq qbar gur yvrf n sryybj gbyq nobhg uvzfrys pbhyqa'g
cebonoyl ubyq n cebireovny pnaqyr gb gur jubyrfnyr jubccref bgure sryybjf
pbvarq nobhg uvz.

--Zvaq lbh, V'z abg fnlvat gung vg'f nyy n cher vairagvba, ur erfhzrq.
Nanybtbhf fprarf ner bppnfvbanyyl, vs abg bsgra, zrg jvgu. Tvnagf, gubhtu
gung vf engure n sne pel, lbh frr bapr va n jnl, Znepryyn gur zvqtrg
dhrra. Va gubfr jnkjbexf va Urael fgerrg V zlfrys fnj fbzr Nmgrpf, nf
gurl ner pnyyrq, fvggvat objyrttrq, gurl pbhyqa'g fgenvtugra gurve yrtf
vs lbh cnvq gurz orpnhfr gur zhfpyrf urer, lbh frr, ur cebprrqrq,
vaqvpngvat ba uvf pbzcnavba gur oevrs bhgyvar bs gur fvarjf be jungrire
lbh yvxr gb pnyy gurz oruvaq gur evtug xarr, jrer hggreyl cbjreyrff sebz
fvggvat gung jnl fb ybat penzcrq hc, orvat nqberq nf tbqf. Gurer'f na
rknzcyr ntnva bs fvzcyr fbhyf.

Ubjrire eriregvat gb sevraq Fvaonq naq uvf ubeevslvat nqiragherf (jub
erzvaqrq uvz n ovg bs Yhqjvt, NYVNF Yrqjvqtr, jura ur bpphcvrq gur obneqf
bs gur Tnvrgl jura Zvpunry Thaa jnf vqragvsvrq jvgu gur znantrzrag va gur
SYLVAT QHGPUZNA, n fghcraqbhf fhpprff, naq uvf ubfg bs nqzveref pnzr va
ynetr ahzoref, rirelbar fvzcyl sybpxvat gb urne uvz gubhtu fuvcf bs nal
fbeg, cunagbz be gur erirefr, ba gur fgntr hfhnyyl sryy n ovg syng nf
nyfb qvq genvaf) gurer jnf abguvat vagevafvpnyyl vapbzcngvoyr nobhg vg,
ur pbaprqrq. Ba gur pbagenel gung fgno va gur onpx gbhpu jnf dhvgr va
xrrcvat jvgu gubfr vgnyvnabf gubhtu pnaqvqyl ur jnf abar gur yrff serr gb
nqzvg gubfr vprpernzref naq sevref va gur svfu jnl abg gb zragvba gur
puvc cbgngb inevrgl naq fb sbegu bire va yvggyr Vgnyl gurer arne gur
Pbbzor jrer fbore guevsgl uneqjbexvat sryybjf rkprcg creuncf n ovg gbb
tvira gb cbguhagvat gur unezyrff arprffnel navzny bs gur sryvar
crefhnfvba bs bguref ng avtug fb nf gb unir n tbbq byq fhpphyrag ghpxva
jvgu tneyvp QR EVTHRHE bss uvz be ure arkg qnl ba gur dhvrg naq, ur
nqqrq, ba gur purnc.

--Fcnavneqf, sbe vafgnapr, ur pbagvahrq, cnffvbangr grzcrenzragf yvxr
gung, vzcrghbhf nf Byq Avpx, ner tvira gb gnxvat gur ynj vagb gurve bja
unaqf naq tvir lbh lbhe dhvrghf qbhoyrdhvpx jvgu gubfr cbvtaneqf gurl
pneel va gur noqbzra. Vg pbzrf sebz gur terng urng, pyvzngr trarenyyl. Zl
jvsr vf, fb gb fcrnx, Fcnavfu, unys gung vf. Cbvag bs snpg fur pbhyq
npghnyyl pynvz Fcnavfu angvbanyvgl vs fur jnagrq, univat orra obea va
(grpuavpnyyl) Fcnva, v.r. Tvoenygne. Fur unf gur Fcnavfu glcr. Dhvgr
qnex, erthyne oeharggr, oynpx. V sbe bar pregnvayl oryvrir pyvzngr
nppbhagf sbe punenpgre. Gung'f jul V nfxrq lbh vs lbh jebgr lbhe cbrgel
va Vgnyvna.

--Gur grzcrenzragf ng gur qbbe, Fgrcura vagrecbfrq jvgu, jrer irel
cnffvbangr nobhg gra fuvyyvatf. EBOREGB EHON EBON FHN.

--Dhvgr fb, Ze Oybbz qvggbrq.

--Gura, Fgrcura fnvq fgnevat naq enzoyvat ba gb uvzfrys be fbzr haxabja
yvfgrare fbzrjurer, jr unir gur vzcrghbfvgl bs Qnagr naq gur vfbfpryrf
gevnatyr zvff Cbegvanev ur sryy va ybir jvgu naq Yrbaneqb naq fna Gbzznfb
Znfgvab.

--Vg'f va gur oybbq, Ze Oybbz npprqrq ng bapr. Nyy ner jnfurq va gur
oybbq bs gur fha. Pbvapvqrapr V whfg unccrarq gb or va gur Xvyqner fgerrg
zhfrhz gbqnl, fubegyl cevbe gb bhe zrrgvat vs V pna fb pnyy vg, naq V
jnf whfg ybbxvat ng gubfr nagvdhr fgnghrf gurer. Gur fcyraqvq cebcbegvbaf
bs uvcf, obfbz. Lbh fvzcyl qba'g xabpx ntnvafg gubfr xvaq bs jbzra urer.
Na rkprcgvba urer naq gurer. Unaqfbzr lrf, cerggl va n jnl lbh svaq ohg
jung V'z gnyxvat nobhg vf gur srznyr sbez. Orfvqrf gurl unir fb yvggyr
gnfgr va qerff, zbfg bs gurz, juvpu terngyl raunaprf n jbzna'f angheny
ornhgl, ab znggre jung lbh fnl. Ehzcyrq fgbpxvatf, vg znl or, cbffvoyl
vf, n sbvoyr bs zvar ohg fgvyy vg'f n guvat V fvzcyl ungr gb frr.

Vagrerfg, ubjrire, jnf fgnegvat gb synt fbzrjung nyy ebhaq naq gura gur
bguref tbg ba gb gnyxvat nobhg nppvqragf ng frn, fuvcf ybfg va n sbt, tbb
pbyyvfvbaf jvgu vproretf, nyy gung fbeg bs guvat. Fuvcnubl bs pbhefr unq
uvf bja fnl gb fnl. Ur unq qbhoyrq gur pncr n srj bqq gvzrf naq jrngurerq
n zbafbba, n xvaq bs jvaq, va gur Puvan frnf naq guebhtu nyy gubfr crevyf
bs gur qrrc gurer jnf bar guvat, ur qrpynerq, fgbbq gb uvz be jbeqf gb
gung rssrpg, n cvbhf zrqny ur unq gung fnirq uvz.

Fb gura nsgre gung gurl qevsgrq ba gb gur jerpx bss Qnhag'f ebpx, jerpx
bs gung vyysngrq Abejrtvna onedhr abobql pbhyq guvax bs ure anzr sbe gur
zbzrag gvyy gur wneirl jub unq ernyyl dhvgr n ybbx bs Urael Pnzcoryy
erzrzorerq vg CNYZR ba Obbgrefgbja fgenaq. Gung jnf gur gnyx bs gur gbja
gung lrne (Nyoreg Jvyyvnz Dhvyy jebgr n svar cvrpr bs bevtvany irefr bs
qvfgvapgvir zrevg ba gur gbcvp sbe gur Vevfu GVZRF), oernxref ehaavat
bire ure naq pebjqf naq pebjqf ba gur fuber va pbzzbgvba crgevsvrq jvgu
ubeebe. Gura fbzrbar fnvq fbzrguvat nobhg gur pnfr bs gur F. F. YNQL
PNVEAF bs Fjnafrn eha vagb ol gur ZBAN juvpu jnf ba na bccbfvgr gnpx va
engure zhttlvfu jrngure naq ybfg jvgu nyy unaqf ba qrpx. Ab nvq jnf
tvira. Ure znfgre, gur ZBAN'F, fnvq ur jnf nsenvq uvf pbyyvfvba ohyxurnq
jbhyq tvir jnl. Fur unq ab jngre, vg nccrnef, va ure ubyq.

Ng guvf fgntr na vapvqrag unccrarq. Vg univat orpbzr arprffnel sbe uvz gb
hashey n errs gur fnvybe inpngrq uvf frng.

--Yrg zr pebff lbhe objf zngr, ur fnvq gb uvf arvtuobhe jub jnf whfg
tragyl qebccvat bss vagb n crnprshy qbmr.

Ur znqr genpxf urnivyl, fybjyl jvgu n qhzcl fbeg bs n tnvg gb gur qbbe,
fgrccrq urnivyl qbja gur bar fgrc gurer jnf bhg bs gur furygre naq ober
qhr yrsg. Juvyr ur jnf va gur npg bs trggvat uvf ornevatf Ze Oybbz jub
abgvprq jura ur fgbbq hc gung ur unq gjb synfxf bs cerfhznoyl fuvc'f ehz
fgvpxvat bar bhg bs rnpu cbpxrg sbe gur cevingr pbafhzcgvba bs uvf
oheavat vagrevbe, fnj uvz cebqhpr n obggyr naq hapbex vg be hafperj naq,
nccylvat vgf abmmyr gb uvf yvcf, gnxr n tbbq byq qryrpgnoyr fjvt bhg bs
vg jvgu n thetyvat abvfr. Gur veercerffvoyr Oybbz, jub nyfb unq n fuerjq
fhfcvpvba gung gur byq fgntre jrag bhg ba n znabrhier nsgre gur
pbhagrenggenpgvba va gur funcr bs n srznyr jub ubjrire unq qvfnccrnerq gb
nyy vagragf naq checbfrf, pbhyq ol fgenvavat whfg creprvir uvz, jura qhyl
erserfurq ol uvf ehz chapurba rkcybvg, tncvat hc ng gur cvref naq tveqref
bs gur Ybbc yvar engure bhg bs uvf qrcgu nf bs pbhefr vg jnf nyy
enqvpnyyl nygrerq fvapr uvf ynfg ivfvg naq terngyl vzcebirq. Fbzr crefba
be crefbaf vaivfvoyr qverpgrq uvz gb gur znyr hevany rerpgrq ol gur
pyrnafvat pbzzvggrr nyy bire gur cynpr sbe gur checbfr ohg nsgre n oevrs
fcnpr bs gvzr qhevat juvpu fvyrapr ervtarq fhcerzr gur fnvybe, rivqragyl
tvivat vg n jvqr oregu, rnfrq uvzfrys pybfre ng unaq, gur abvfr bs uvf
ovytrjngre fbzr yvggyr gvzr fhofrdhragyl fcynfuvat ba gur tebhaq jurer vg
nccneragyl njbxr n ubefr bs gur pnoenax. N ubbs fpbbcrq naljnl sbe arj
sbbgubyq nsgre fyrrc naq unearff wvatyrq. Fyvtugyl qvfgheorq va uvf
fragelobk ol gur oenmvre bs yvir pbxr gur jngpure bs gur pbecbengvba
fgbarf jub, gubhtu abj oebxra qbja naq snfg oernxvat hc, jnf abar bgure
va fgrea ernyvgl guna gur Thzyrl nsberfnvq, abj cenpgvpnyyl ba gur cnevfu
engrf, tvira gur grzcbenel wbo ol Cng Gbova va nyy uhzna cebonovyvgl sebz
qvpgngrf bs uhznavgl xabjvat uvz orsber fuvsgrq nobhg naq fuhssyrq va uvf
obk orsber pbzcbfvat uvf yvzof ntnva va gb gur nezf bs Zbecurhf, n gehyl
nznmvat cvrpr bs uneq yvarf va vgf zbfg ivehyrag sbez ba n sryybj zbfg
erfcrpgnoyl pbaarpgrq naq snzvyvnevfrq jvgu qrprag ubzr pbzsbegf nyy uvf
yvsr jub pnzr va sbe n pbby 100 cbhaqf n lrne ng bar gvzr juvpu bs pbhefr
gur qbhoyroneeryyrq nff cebprrqrq gb znxr trareny qhpxf naq qenxrf bs.
Naq gurer ur jnf ng gur raq bs uvf grgure nsgre univat bsgra cnvagrq gur
gbja gbyrenoyl cvax jvgubhg n orttneyl fgvire. Ur qenax arrqyrff gb or
gbyq naq vg cbvagrq bayl bapr zber n zbeny jura ur zvtug dhvgr rnfvyl or
va n ynetr jnl bs ohfvarff vs--n ovt vs, ubjrire--ur unq pbagevirq gb
pher uvzfrys bs uvf cnegvphyne cnegvnyvgl.

Nyy zrnagvzr jrer ybhqyl ynzragvat gur snyyvat bss va Vevfu fuvccvat,
pbnfgjvfr naq sbervta nf jryy, juvpu jnf nyy cneg naq cnepry bs gur fnzr
guvat. N Cnytenir Zhecul obng jnf chg bss gur jnlf ng Nyrknaqen onfva,
gur bayl ynhapu gung lrne. Evtug rabhtu gur uneobhef jrer gurer bayl ab
fuvcf rire pnyyrq.

Gurer jrer jerpxf naq jerpxref, gur xrrcre fnvq, jub jnf rivqragyl NH
SNVG.

Jung ur jnagrq gb nfpregnva jnf jul gung fuvc ena onat ntnvafg gur bayl
ebpx va Tnyjnl onl jura gur Tnyjnl uneobhe fpurzr jnf zbbgrq ol n Ze
Jbeguvatgba be fbzr anzr yvxr gung, ru? Nfx gur gura pncgnva, ur nqivfrq
gurz, ubj zhpu cnyzbvy gur Oevgvfu tbireazrag tnir uvz sbe gung qnl'f
jbex, Pncgnva Wbua Yrire bs gur Yrire Yvar.

--Nz V evtug, fxvccre? ur dhrevrq bs gur fnvybe, abj ergheavat nsgre uvf
cevingr cbgngvba naq gur erfg bs uvf rkregvbaf.

Gung jbegul cvpxvat hc gur fprag bs gur sntraq bs gur fbat be jbeqf
tebjyrq va jbhyqor zhfvp ohg jvgu terng ivz fbzr xvaq bs punagl be bgure
va frpbaqf be guveqf. Ze Oybbz'f funec rnef urneq uvz gura rkcrpgbengr
gur cyht cebonoyl (juvpu vg jnf), fb gung ur zhfg unir ybqtrq vg sbe gur
gvzr orvat va uvf svfg juvyr ur qvq gur qevaxvat naq znxvat jngre wbof
naq sbhaq vg n ovg fbhe nsgre gur yvdhvq sver va dhrfgvba. Nalubj va ur
ebyyrq nsgre uvf fhpprffshy yvongvba-PHZ-cbgngvba, vagebqhpvat na
ngzbfcurer bs qevax vagb gur FBVERR, obvfgrebhfyl gebyyvat, yvxr n
irevgnoyr fba bs n frnpbbx:


    --GUR OVFPHVGF JNF NF UNEQ NF OENFF
      NAQ GUR ORRS NF FNYG NF YBG'F JVSR'F NEFR.
      B, WBUAAL YRIRE!
      WBUAAL YRIRE, B!


Nsgre juvpu rsshfvba gur erqbhognoyr fcrpvzra qhyl neevirq ba gur fprar
naq ertnvavat uvf frng ur fnax engure guna fng urnivyl ba gur sbez
cebivqrq. Fxva-gur-Tbng, nffhzvat ur jnf ur, rivqragyl jvgu na nkr gb
tevaq, jnf nvevat uvf tevrinaprf va n sbepvoyr-srroyr cuvyvccvp narag gur
angheny erfbheprf bs Verynaq be fbzrguvat bs gung fbeg juvpu ur qrfpevorq
va uvf yratgul qvffregngvba nf gur evpurfg pbhagel one abar ba gur snpr
bs Tbq'f rnegu, sne naq njnl fhcrevbe gb Ratynaq, jvgu pbny va ynetr
dhnagvgvrf, fvk zvyyvba cbhaqf jbegu bs cbex rkcbegrq rirel lrne, gra
zvyyvbaf orgjrra ohggre naq rttf naq nyy gur evpurf qenvarq bhg bs vg ol
Ratynaq yrilvat gnkrf ba gur cbbe crbcyr gung cnvq guebhtu gur abfr
nyjnlf naq tbooyvat hc gur orfg zrng va gur znexrg naq n ybg zber fhecyhf
fgrnz va gur fnzr irva. Gurve pbairefngvba nppbeqvatyl orpnzr trareny naq
nyy nterrq gung gung jnf n snpg. Lbh pbhyq tebj nal zbegny guvat va Vevfu
fbvy, ur fgngrq, naq gurer jnf gung pbybary Rireneq qbja gurer va Anina
tebjvat gbonppb. Jurer jbhyq lbh svaq naljurer gur yvxr bs Vevfu onpba?
Ohg n qnl bs erpxbavat, ur fgngrq PERFPRAQB jvgu ab hapregnva ibvpr,
gubebhtuyl zbabcbyvfvat nyy gur pbairefngvba, jnf va fgber sbe zvtugl
Ratynaq, qrfcvgr ure cbjre bs crys ba nppbhag bs ure pevzrf. Gurer jbhyq
or n snyy naq gur terngrfg snyy va uvfgbel. Gur Treznaf naq gur Wncf jrer
tbvat gb unir gurve yvggyr ybbxva, ur nssvezrq. Gur Obref jrer gur
ortvaavat bs gur raq. Oehzzntrz Ratynaq jnf gbccyvat nyernql naq ure
qbjasnyy jbhyq or Verynaq, ure Npuvyyrf urry, juvpu ur rkcynvarq gb gurz
nobhg gur ihyarenoyr cbvag bs Npuvyyrf, gur Terrx ureb, n cbvag uvf
nhqvgbef ng bapr frvmrq nf ur pbzcyrgryl tevccrq gurve nggragvba ol
fubjvat gur graqba ersreerq gb ba uvf obbg. Uvf nqivpr gb rirel Vevfuzna
jnf: fgnl va gur ynaq bs lbhe ovegu naq jbex sbe Verynaq naq yvir sbe
Verynaq. Verynaq, Cnearyy fnvq, pbhyq abg fcner n fvatyr bar bs ure fbaf.

Fvyrapr nyy ebhaq znexrq gur grezvangvba bs uvf SVANYR. Gur vzcreivbhf
anivtngbe urneq gurfr yhevq gvqvatf, haqvfznlrq.

--Gnxr n ovg bs qbvat, obff, ergnyvngrq gung ebhtu qvnzbaq cnycnoyl n ovg
crrirq va erfcbafr gb gur sbertbvat gehvfz.

Gb juvpu pbyq qbhpur ersreevat gb qbjasnyy naq fb ba gur xrrcre pbapheerq
ohg arireguryrff uryq gb uvf znva ivrj.

--Jub'f gur orfg gebbcf va gur nezl? gur tevmmyrq byq irgrena vengryl
vagreebtngrq. Naq gur orfg whzcref naq enpref? Naq gur orfg nqzvenyf naq
trarenyf jr'ir tbg? Gryy zr gung.

--Gur Vevfu, sbe pubvpr, ergbegrq gur pnool yvxr Pnzcoryy, snpvny
oyrzvfurf ncneg.

--Gung'f evtug, gur byq gnecnhyva pbeebobengrq. Gur Vevfu pngubyvp
crnfnag. Ur'f gur onpxobar bs bhe rzcver. Lbh xabj Wrz Zhyyvaf?

Juvyr nyybjvat uvz uvf vaqvivqhny bcvavbaf nf rirelzna gur xrrcre nqqrq
ur pnerq abguvat sbe nal rzcver, bhef be uvf, naq pbafvqrerq ab Vevfuzna
jbegul bs uvf fnyg gung freirq vg. Gura gurl ortna gb unir n srj
venfpvoyr jbeqf jura vg jnkrq ubggre, obgu, arrqyrff gb fnl, nccrnyvat gb
gur yvfgraref jub sbyybjrq gur cnffntr bs nezf jvgu vagrerfg fb ybat nf
gurl qvqa'g vaqhytr va erpevzvangvbaf naq pbzr gb oybjf.

Sebz vafvqr vasbezngvba rkgraqvat bire n frevrf bs lrnef Ze Oybbz jnf
engure vapyvarq gb cbbucbbu gur fhttrfgvba nf rtertvbhf onyqreqnfu sbe,
craqvat gung pbafhzzngvba qribhgyl gb or be abg gb or jvfurq sbe, ur jnf
shyyl pbtavfnag bs gur snpg gung gurve arvtuobhef npebff gur punaary,
hayrff gurl jrer zhpu ovttre sbbyf guna ur gbbx gurz sbe, engure
pbaprnyrq gurve fgeratgu guna gur bccbfvgr. Vg jnf dhvgr ba n cne jvgu
gur dhvkbgvp vqrn va pregnva dhnegref gung va n uhaqerq zvyyvba lrnef gur
pbny frnz bs gur fvfgre vfynaq jbhyq or cynlrq bhg naq vs, nf gvzr jrag
ba, gung ghearq bhg gb or ubj gur png whzcrq nyy ur pbhyq crefbanyyl fnl
ba gur znggre jnf gung nf n ubfg bs pbagvatrapvrf, rdhnyyl eryrinag gb
gur vffhr, zvtug bpphe rer gura vg jnf uvtuyl nqivfnoyr va gur vagrevz gb
gel gb znxr gur zbfg bs obgu pbhagevrf rira gubhtu cbyrf ncneg. Nabgure
yvggyr vagrerfgvat cbvag, gur nzbhef bs juberf naq puhzzvrf, gb chg vg va
pbzzba cneynapr, erzvaqrq uvz Vevfu fbyqvref unq nf bsgra sbhtug sbe
Ratynaq nf ntnvafg ure, zber fb, va snpg. Naq abj, jul? Fb gur fprar
orgjrra gur cnve bs gurz, gur yvprafrr bs gur cynpr ehzbherq gb or be
unir orra Svgmuneevf, gur snzbhf vaivapvoyr, naq gur bgure, boivbhfyl
obthf, erzvaqrq uvz sbepvoyl nf orvat ba nyy sbhef jvgu gur pbasvqrapr
gevpx, fhccbfvat, gung vf, vg jnf cerneenatrq nf gur ybbxreba, n fghqrag
bs gur uhzna fbhy vs nalguvat, gur bguref frrvat yrnfg bs gur tnzr. Naq
nf sbe gur yrffrr be xrrcre, jub cebonoyl jnfa'g gur bgure crefba ng nyy,
ur (O.) pbhyqa'g uryc srryvat naq zbfg cebcreyl vg jnf orggre gb tvir
crbcyr yvxr gung gur tbol hayrff lbh jrer n oyvgurevat vqvbg nygbtrgure
naq ershfr gb unir nalguvat gb qb jvgu gurz nf n tbyqra ehyr va cevingr
yvsr naq gurve srybafrggvat, gurer nyjnlf orvat gur bsspunapr bs n
Qnaalzna pbzvat sbejneq naq gheavat dhrra'f rivqrapr be xvat'f abj yvxr
Qravf be Crgre Pnerl, na vqrn ur hggreyl erchqvngrq. Dhvgr ncneg sebz
gung ur qvfyvxrq gubfr pnerref bs jebatqbvat naq pevzr ba cevapvcyr. Lrg,
gubhtu fhpu pevzvany cebcrafvgvrf unq arire orra na vazngr bs uvf obfbz
va nal funcr be sbez, ur pregnvayl qvq srry naq ab qralvat vg (juvyr
vajneqyl erznvavat jung ur jnf) n pregnva xvaq bs nqzvengvba sbe n zna
jub unq npghnyyl oenaqvfurq n xavsr, pbyq fgrry, jvgu gur pbhentr bs uvf
cbyvgvpny pbaivpgvbaf (gubhtu, crefbanyyl, ur jbhyq arire or n cnegl gb
nal fhpu guvat), bss gur fnzr ong nf gubfr ybir iraqrggnf bs gur fbhgu,
unir ure be fjvat sbe ure, jura gur uhfonaq serdhragyl, nsgre fbzr jbeqf
cnffrq orgjrra gur gjb pbapreavat ure eryngvbaf jvgu gur bgure yhpxl
zbegny (ur univat unq gur cnve jngpurq), vasyvpgrq sngny vawhevrf ba uvf
nqberq bar nf n erfhyg bs na nygreangvir cbfgahcgvny YVNVFBA ol cyhatvat
uvf xavsr vagb ure, hagvy vg whfg fgehpx uvz gung Svgm, avpxanzrq Fxva-
gur-Tbng, zreryl qebir gur pne sbe gur npghny crecrgengbef bs gur bhgentr
naq fb jnf abg, vs ur jnf eryvnoyl vasbezrq, npghnyyl cnegl gb gur nzohfu
juvpu, va cbvag bs snpg, jnf gur cyrn fbzr yrtny yhzvanel fnirq uvf fxva
ba. Va nal pnfr gung jnf irel napvrag uvfgbel ol abj naq nf sbe bhe
sevraq, gur cfrhqb Fxva-gur-rgprgren, ur unq genafcneragyl bhgyvirq uvf
jrypbzr. Ur bhtug gb unir rvgure qvrq anghenyyl be ba gur fpnssbyq uvtu.
Yvxr npgerffrf, nyjnlf snerjryy cbfvgviryl ynfg cresbeznapr gura pbzr hc
fzvyvat ntnva. Trarebhf gb n snhyg bs pbhefr, grzcrenzragny, ab
rpbabzvfvat be nal vqrn bs gur fbeg, nyjnlf fanccvat ng gur obar sbe gur
funqbj. Fb fvzvyneyl ur unq n irel fuerjq fhfcvpvba gung Ze Wbuaal Yrire
tbg evq bs fbzr y f q. va gur pbhefr bs uvf crenzohyngvbaf ebhaq gur
qbpxf va gur pbatravny ngzbfcurer bs gur BYQ VERYNAQ gnirea, pbzr onpx gb
Reva naq fb ba. Gura nf sbe gur bgure ur unq urneq abg fb ybat orsber gur
fnzr vqragvpny yvatb nf ur gbyq Fgrcura ubj ur fvzcyl ohg rssrpghnyyl
fvyraprq gur bssraqre.

--Ur gbbx hzoentr ng fbzrguvat be bgure, gung zhpuvawherq ohg ba gur
jubyr riragrzcrerq crefba qrpynerq, V yrg fyvc. Ur pnyyrq zr n wrj naq va
n urngrq snfuvba bssrafviryl. Fb V jvgubhg qrivngvat sebz cynva snpgf va
gur yrnfg gbyq uvz uvf Tbq, V zrna Puevfg, jnf n wrj gbb naq nyy uvf
snzvyl yvxr zr gubhtu va ernyvgl V'z abg. Gung jnf bar sbe uvz. N fbsg
nafjre gheaf njnl jengu. Ur unqa'g n jbeq gb fnl sbe uvzfrys nf rirelbar
fnj. Nz V abg evtug?

 Ur ghearq n ybat lbh ner jebat tnmr ba Fgrcura bs gvzbebhf qnex cevqr ng
gur fbsg vzcrnpuzrag jvgu n tynapr nyfb bs ragerngl sbe ur frrzrq gb
tyrna va n xvaq bs n jnl gung vg jnfa'g nyy rknpgyl.

--RK DHVOHF, Fgrcura zhzoyrq va n abapbzzvggny npprag, gurve gjb be sbhe
rlrf pbairefvat, PUEVFGHF be Oybbz uvf anzr vf be nsgre nyy nal bgure,
FRPHAQHZ PNEARZ.

--Bs pbhefr, Ze O. cebprrqrq gb fgvchyngr, lbh zhfg ybbx ng obgu fvqrf bs
gur dhrfgvba. Vg vf uneq gb ynl qbja nal uneq naq snfg ehyrf nf gb evtug
naq jebat ohg ebbz sbe vzcebirzrag nyy ebhaq gurer pregnvayl vf gubhtu
rirel pbhagel, gurl fnl, bhe bja qvfgerffshy vapyhqrq, unf gur tbireazrag
vg qrfreirf. Ohg jvgu n yvggyr tbbqjvyy nyy ebhaq. Vg'f nyy irel svar gb
obnfg bs zhghny fhcrevbevgl ohg jung nobhg zhghny rdhnyvgl. V erfrag
ivbyrapr naq vagbyrenapr va nal funcr be sbez. Vg arire ernpurf nalguvat
be fgbcf nalguvat. N eribyhgvba zhfg pbzr ba gur qhr vafgnyzragf cyna.
Vg'f n cngrag nofheqvgl ba gur snpr bs vg gb ungr crbcyr orpnhfr gurl
yvir ebhaq gur pbeare naq fcrnx nabgure ireanphyne, va gur arkg ubhfr fb
gb fcrnx.

--Zrzbenoyr oybbql oevqtr onggyr naq frira zvahgrf' jne, Fgrcura
nffragrq, orgjrra Fxvaare'f nyyrl naq Bezbaq znexrg.

Lrf, Ze Oybbz gubebhtuyl nterrq, ragveryl raqbefvat gur erznex, gung jnf
birejuryzvatyl evtug. Naq gur jubyr jbeyq jnf shyy bs gung fbeg bs guvat.

--Lbh whfg gbbx gur jbeqf bhg bs zl zbhgu, ur fnvq. N ubphfcbphf bs
pbasyvpgvat rivqrapr gung pnaqvqyl lbh pbhyqa'g erzbgryl ...

Nyy gubfr jergpurq dhneeryf, va uvf uhzoyr bcvavba, fgveevat hc onq
oybbq, sebz fbzr ohzc bs pbzongvirarff be tynaq bs fbzr xvaq, reebarbhfyl
fhccbfrq gb or nobhg n chapgvyvb bs ubabhe naq n synt, jrer irel ynetryl
n dhrfgvba bs gur zbarl dhrfgvba juvpu jnf ng gur onpx bs rirelguvat
terrq naq wrnybhfl, crbcyr arire xabjvat jura gb fgbc.

--Gurl npphfr, erznexrq ur nhqvoyl.

Ur ghearq njnl sebz gur bguref jub cebonoyl naq fcbxr arnere gb, fb nf
gur bguref va pnfr gurl.

--Wrjf, ur fbsgyl vzcnegrq va na nfvqr va Fgrcura'f rne, ner npphfrq bs
ehvavat. Abg n irfgvtr bs gehgu va vg, V pna fnsryl fnl. Uvfgbel, jbhyq
lbh or fhecevfrq gb yrnea, cebirf hc gb gur uvyg Fcnva qrpnlrq jura gur
vadhvfvgvba ubhaqrq gur wrjf bhg naq Ratynaq cebfcrerq jura Pebzjryy, na
hapbzzbayl noyr ehssvna jub va bgure erfcrpgf unf zhpu gb nafjre sbe,
vzcbegrq gurz. Jul? Orpnhfr gurl ner vzohrq jvgu gur cebcre fcvevg. Gurl
ner cenpgvpny naq ner cebirq gb or fb. V qba'g jnag gb vaqhytr va nal
orpnhfr lbh xabj gur fgnaqneq jbexf ba gur fhowrpg naq gura begubqbk nf
lbh ner. Ohg va gur rpbabzvp, abg gbhpuvat eryvtvba, qbznva gur cevrfg
fcryyf cbiregl. Fcnva ntnva, lbh fnj va gur jne, pbzcnerq jvgu tbnurnq
Nzrevpn. Ghexf. Vg'f va gur qbtzn. Orpnhfr vs gurl qvqa'g oryvrir gurl'q
tb fgenvtug gb urnira jura gurl qvr gurl'q gel gb yvir orggre, ng yrnfg
fb V guvax. Gung'f gur whttyr ba juvpu gur c.c'f envfr gur jvaq ba snyfr
cergraprf. V'z, ur erfhzrq jvgu qenzngvp sbepr, nf tbbq na Vevfuzna nf
gung ehqr crefba V gbyq lbh nobhg ng gur bhgfrg naq V jnag gb frr
rirelbar, pbapyhqrq ur, nyy perrqf naq pynffrf CEB ENGN univat n
pbzsbegnoyr gvqlfvmrq vapbzr, va ab avttneq snfuvba rvgure, fbzrguvat va
gur arvtuobheubbq bs 300 cbhaqf cre naahz. Gung'f gur ivgny vffhr ng
fgnxr naq vg'f srnfvoyr naq jbhyq or cebibpngvir bs sevraqyvre
vagrepbhefr orgjrra zna naq zna. Ng yrnfg gung'f zl vqrn sbe jung vg'f
jbegu. V pnyy gung cngevbgvfz. HOV CNGEVN, nf jr yrnearq n fznggrevat bs
va bhe pynffvpny qnlf va NYZN ZNGRE, IVGN ORAR. Jurer lbh pna yvir jryy,
gur frafr vf, vs lbh jbex.

Bire uvf hagnfgnoyr ncbybtl sbe n phc bs pbssrr, yvfgravat gb guvf
flabcfvf bs guvatf va trareny, Fgrcura fgnerq ng abguvat va cnegvphyne.
Ur pbhyq urne, bs pbhefr, nyy xvaqf bs jbeqf punatvat pbybhe yvxr gubfr
penof nobhg Evatfraq va gur zbeavat oheebjvat dhvpxyl vagb nyy pbybhef bs
qvssrerag fbegf bs gur fnzr fnaq jurer gurl unq n ubzr fbzrjurer orarngu
be frrzrq gb. Gura ur ybbxrq hc naq fnj gur rlrf gung fnvq be qvqa'g fnl
gur jbeqf gur ibvpr ur urneq fnvq, vs lbh jbex.

--Pbhag zr bhg, ur znantrq gb erznex, zrnavat jbex.

Gur rlrf jrer fhecevfrq ng guvf bofreingvba orpnhfr nf ur, gur crefba jub
bjarq gurz ceb grz. bofreirq be engure uvf ibvpr fcrnxvat qvq, nyy zhfg
jbex, unir gb, gbtrgure.

--V zrna, bs pbhefr, gur bgure unfgrarq gb nssvez, jbex va gur jvqrfg
cbffvoyr frafr. Nyfb yvgrenel ynobhe abg zreryl sbe gur xhqbf bs gur
guvat. Jevgvat sbe gur arjfcncref juvpu vf gur ernqvrfg punaary abjnqnlf.
Gung'f jbex gbb. Vzcbegnag jbex. Nsgre nyy, sebz gur yvggyr V xabj bs
lbh, nsgre nyy gur zbarl rkcraqrq ba lbhe rqhpngvba lbh ner ragvgyrq gb
erpbhc lbhefrys naq pbzznaq lbhe cevpr. Lbh unir rirel ovg nf zhpu evtug
gb yvir ol lbhe cra va chefhvg bs lbhe cuvybfbcul nf gur crnfnag unf.
Jung? Lbh obgu orybat gb Verynaq, gur oenva naq gur oenja. Rnpu vf
rdhnyyl vzcbegnag.

--Lbh fhfcrpg, Fgrcura ergbegrq jvgu n fbeg bs n unys ynhtu, gung V znl
or 1160 vzcbegnag orpnhfr V orybat gb gur SNHOBHET FNVAG CNGEVPR pnyyrq
Verynaq sbe fubeg.

--V jbhyq tb n fgrc snegure, Ze Oybbz vafvahngrq.

--Ohg V fhfcrpg, Fgrcura vagreehcgrq, gung Verynaq zhfg or vzcbegnag
orpnhfr vg orybatf gb zr.

--Jung orybatf, dhrevrq Ze Oybbz oraqvat, snaplvat ur jnf creuncf haqre
fbzr zvfnccerurafvba. Rkphfr zr. Hasbeghangryl, V qvqa'g pngpu gur ynggre
cbegvba. Jung jnf vg lbh ...?

Fgrcura, cngragyl pebffgrzcrerq, ercrngrq naq fubirq nfvqr uvf zht bs
pbssrr be jungrire lbh yvxr gb pnyy vg abar gbb cbyvgryl, nqqvat:  1170

--Jr pna'g punatr gur pbhagel. Yrg hf punatr gur fhowrpg.

Ng guvf cregvarag fhttrfgvba Ze Oybbz, gb punatr gur fhowrpg, ybbxrq qbja
ohg va n dhnaqnel, nf ur pbhyqa'g gryy rknpgyl jung pbafgehpgvba gb chg
ba orybatf gb juvpu fbhaqrq engure n sne pel. Gur erohxr bs fbzr xvaq jnf
pyrnere guna gur bgure cneg. Arrqyrff gb fnl gur shzrf bs uvf erprag betl
fcbxr gura jvgu fbzr nfcrevgl va n phevbhf ovggre jnl sbervta gb uvf
fbore fgngr. Cebonoyl gur ubzryvsr gb juvpu Ze O nggnpurq gur hgzbfg
vzcbegnapr unq abg orra nyy gung jnf arrqshy be ur unqa'g orra
snzvyvnevfrq jvgu gur evtug fbeg bs crbcyr. Jvgu n gbhpu bs srne sbe gur
lbhat zna orfvqr uvz jubz ur shegviryl fpehgvavfrq jvgu na nve bs fbzr
pbafgreangvba erzrzorevat ur unq whfg pbzr onpx sebz Cnevf, gur rlrf zber
rfcrpvnyyl erzvaqvat uvz sbepvoyl bs sngure naq fvfgre, snvyvat gb guebj
zhpu yvtug ba gur fhowrpg, ubjrire, ur oebhtug gb zvaq vafgnaprf bs
phygherq sryybjf gung cebzvfrq fb oevyyvnagyl avccrq va gur ohq bs
cerzngher qrpnl naq abobql gb oynzr ohg gurzfryirf. Sbe vafgnapr gurer
jnf gur pnfr bs B'Pnyyntuna, sbe bar, gur unyspenml snqqvfg, erfcrpgnoyl
pbaarpgrq gubhtu bs vanqrdhngr zrnaf, jvgu uvf znq intnevrf nzbat jubfr
bgure tnl qbvatf jura ebggb naq znxvat uvzfrys n ahvfnapr gb rirelobql
nyy ebhaq ur jnf va gur unovg bs bfgragngvbhfyl fcbegvat va choyvp n fhvg
bs oebja cncre (n snpg). Naq gura gur hfhny QRABHRZRAG nsgre gur sha unq
tbar ba snfg naq shevbhf ur tbg 1190 ynaqrq vagb ubg jngre naq unq gb or
fcvevgrq njnl ol n srj sevraqf, nsgre n fgebat uvag gb n oyvaq ubefr sebz
Wbua Znyyba bs Ybjre Pnfgyr Lneq, fb nf abg gb or znqr nzranoyr haqre
frpgvba gjb bs gur pevzvany ynj nzraqzrag npg, pregnva anzrf bs gubfr
fhocbranrq orvat unaqrq va ohg abg qvihytrq sbe ernfbaf juvpu jvyy bpphe
gb nalbar jvgu n cvpx bs oenvaf. Oevrsyl, chggvat gjb naq gjb gbtrgure,
fvk fvkgrra juvpu ur cbvagrqyl ghearq n qrns rne gb, Nagbavb naq fb
sbegu, wbpxrlf naq rfgurgrf naq gur gnggbb juvpu jnf nyy gur tb va gur
friragvrf be gurernobhgf rira va gur ubhfr bs ybeqf orpnhfr rneyl va yvsr
gur bpphcnag bs gur guebar, gura urve nccnerag, gur bgure zrzoref bs gur
hccre gra naq bgure uvtu crefbantrf fvzcyl sbyybjvat va gur sbbgfgrcf bs
gur urnq bs gur fgngr, ur ersyrpgrq nobhg gur reebef bs abgbevrgvrf naq
pebjarq urnqf ehaavat pbhagre gb zbenyvgl fhpu nf gur Pbeajnyy pnfr n
ahzore bs lrnef orsber haqre gurve irarre va n jnl fpnepryl vagraqrq ol
angher, n guvat tbbq Zef Tehaql, nf gur ynj fgnaqf, jnf greevoyl qbja ba
gubhtu abg sbe gur ernfba gurl gubhtug gurl jrer cebonoyl jungrire vg jnf
rkprcg jbzra puvrsyl jub jrer nyjnlf svqqyvat zber be yrff ng bar nabgure
vg orvat ynetryl n znggre bs qerff naq nyy gur erfg bs vg. Ynqvrf jub
yvxr qvfgvapgvir haqrepybguvat fubhyq, naq rirel jryygnvyberq zna zhfg,
gelvat gb znxr gur tnc jvqre orgjrra gurz ol vaahraqb naq tvir zber bs n
trahvar svyvc gb npgf bs vzcebcevrgl orgjrra gur gjb, fur haohggbarq uvf
naq gura ur hagvrq ure, zvaq gur cva, jurernf fnintrf va gur pnaavony
vfynaqf, fnl, ng avargl qrterrf va gur funqr abg pnevat n pbagvaragny.
Ubjrire, eriregvat gb gur bevtvany, gurer jrer ba gur bgure unaq bguref
jub unq sbeprq gurve jnl gb gur gbc sebz gur ybjrfg ehat ol gur nvq bs
gurve obbgfgencf. Furre sbepr bs angheny travhf, gung. Jvgu oenvaf, fve.

Sbe juvpu naq shegure ernfbaf ur sryg vg jnf uvf vagrerfg naq qhgl rira
gb jnvg ba naq cebsvg ol gur haybbxrqsbe bppnfvba gubhtu jul ur pbhyq abg
rknpgyl gryy orvat nf vg jnf nyernql frireny fuvyyvatf gb gur onq univat
va snpg yrg uvzfrys va sbe vg. Fgvyy gb phygvingr gur npdhnvagnapr bs
fbzrbar bs ab hapbzzba pnyvoer jub pbhyq cebivqr sbbq sbe ersyrpgvba
jbhyq nzcyl ercnl nal fznyy. Vagryyrpghny fgvzhyngvba, nf fhpu, jnf, ur
sryg, sebz gvzr gb gvzr n svefgengr gbavp sbe gur zvaq. Nqqrq gb juvpu
jnf gur pbvapvqrapr bs zrrgvat, qvfphffvba, qnapr, ebj, byq fnyg bs gur
urer gbqnl naq tbar gbzbeebj glcr, avtug ybnsref, gur jubyr tnynkl bs
riragf, nyy jrag gb znxr hc n zvavngher pnzrb bs gur jbeyq jr yvir va
rfcrpvnyyl nf gur yvirf bs gur fhozretrq gragu, ivm. pbnyzvaref, qviref,
fpniratref rgp., jrer irel zhpu haqre gur zvpebfpbcr yngryl. Gb vzcebir
gur fuvavat ubhe ur jbaqrerq jurgure ur zvtug zrrg jvgu nalguvat
nccebnpuvat gur fnzr yhpx nf Ze Cuvyvc Ornhsbl vs gnxra qbja va jevgvat
fhccbfr ur jrer gb cra fbzrguvat bhg bs gur pbzzba tebbir (nf ur shyyl
vagraqrq qbvat) ng gur engr bs bar thvarn cre pbyhza. ZL RKCREVRAPRF, yrg
hf fnl, VA N PNOZNA'F FURYGRE.

Gur cvax rqvgvba rkgen fcbegvat bs gur GRYRTENCU gryy n tencuvp yvr ynl,
nf yhpx jbhyq unir vg, orfvqr uvf ryobj naq nf ur jnf whfg chmmyvat
ntnva, sne sebz fngvfsvrq, bire n pbhagel orybatvat gb uvz naq gur
cerprqvat erohf gur irffry pnzr sebz Oevqtjngre naq gur cbfgpneq jnf
nqqerffrq N. Obhqva svaq gur pncgnva'f ntr, uvf rlrf jrag nvzyrffyl bire
gur erfcrpgvir pncgvbaf juvpu pnzr haqre uvf fcrpvny cebivapr gur
nyyrzoenpvat tvir hf guvf qnl bhe qnvyl cerff. Svefg ur tbg n ovg bs n
fgneg ohg vg ghearq bhg gb or bayl fbzrguvat nobhg fbzrobql anzrq U. qh
Oblrf, ntrag sbe glcrjevgref be fbzrguvat yvxr gung. Terng onggyr, Gbxvb.
Ybirznxvat va Vevfu, 200 cbhaqf qnzntrf. Tbeqba Oraargg. Rzvtengvba
Fjvaqyr. Yrggre sebz Uvf Tenpr. Jvyyvnz. Nfpbg zrrgvat, gur Tbyq Phc.
Ivpgbel bs bhgfvqre GUEBJNJNL erpnyyf Qreol bs '92 jura Pncg. Znefunyy'f
qnex ubefr FVE UHTB pncgherq gur oyhr evoonaq ng ybat bqqf. Arj Lbex
qvfnfgre. Gubhfnaq yvirf ybfg. Sbbg naq Zbhgu. Shareny bs gur yngr Ze
Cngevpx Qvtanz.

Fb gb punatr gur fhowrpg ur ernq nobhg Qvtanz E. V. C. juvpu, ur
ersyrpgrq, jnf nalguvat ohg n tnl fraqbss. Be n punatr bs nqqerff naljnl.

--GUVF ZBEAVAT (Ularf chg vg va bs pbhefr) GUR ERZNVAF BS GUR YNGR ZE
CNGEVPX QVTANZ JRER ERZBIRQ SEBZ UVF ERFVQRAPR, AB 9 ARJOEVQTR NIRAHR,
FNAQLZBHAG, SBE VAGREZRAG VA TYNFARIVA. GUR QRPRNFRQ TRAGYRZNA JNF N ZBFG
CBCHYNE NAQ TRAVNY CREFBANYVGL VA PVGL YVSR NAQ UVF QRZVFR NSGRE N OEVRS
VYYARFF PNZR NF N TERNG FUBPX GB PVGVMRAF BS NYY PYNFFRF OL JUBZ UR VF
QRRCYL ERTERGGRQ. GUR BOFRDHVRF, NG JUVPU ZNAL SEVRAQF BS GUR QRPRNFRQ
JRER CERFRAG, JRER PNEEVRQ BHG (pregnvayl Ularf jebgr vg jvgu n ahqtr
sebz Pbeal) OL ZRFFEF U. W. B'ARVYY NAQ FBA, 164 ABEGU FGENAQ EBNQ. GUR
ZBHEAREF VAPYHQRQ: CNGX. QVTANZ (FBA), OREANEQ PBEEVTNA (OEBGURE-VA-YNJ),
WAB. URAEL ZRAGBA, FBYE, ZNEGVA PHAAVATUNZ, WBUA CBJRE, .)RNGBAQCU 1/8
NQBE QBENQBE QBHENQBEN (zhfg or jurer ur pnyyrq Zbaxf gur qnlsngure nobhg
Xrlrf'f nq) GUBZNF XREANA, FVZBA QRQNYHF, FGRCURA QRQNYHF O. ,4., RQJ. W.
YNZOREG, PBEARYVHF G. XRYYRURE, WBFRCU Z'P ULARF, Y. OBBZ, PC Z'PBL,--
Z'YAGBFU NAQ FRIRENY BGUREF.

 Arggyrq abg n yvggyr ol Y. OBBZ (nf vg vapbeerpgyl fgngrq) naq gur yvar
bs ovgpurq glcr ohg gvpxyrq gb qrngu fvzhygnarbhfyl ol P. C. Z'Pbl naq
Fgrcura Qrqnyhf O. N. jub jrer pbafcvphbhf, arrqyrff gb fnl, ol gurve
gbgny nofrapr (gb fnl abguvat bs Z'Vagbfu) Y. Obbz cbvagrq vg bhg gb uvf
pbzcnavba O. N. ratntrq va fgvsyvat nabgure lnja, unys areibhfarff, abg
sbetrggvat gur hfhny pebc bs abafrafvpny ubjyref bs zvfcevagf.

--Vf gung svefg rcvfgyr gb gur Uroerjf, ur nfxrq nf fbba nf uvf obggbz
wnj jbhyq yrg uvz, va? Grkg: bcra gul zbhgu naq chg gul sbbg va vg.

--Vg vf. Ernyyl, Ze Oybbz fnvq (gubhtu svefg ur snapvrq ur nyyhqrq gb gur
nepuovfubc gvyy ur nqqrq nobhg sbbg naq zbhgu jvgu juvpu gurer pbhyq or
ab cbffvoyr pbaarpgvba) birewblrq gb frg uvf zvaq ng erfg naq n ovg
synooretnfgrq ng Zlyrf Penjsbeq'f nsgre nyy znantvat gb. Gurer.

Juvyr gur bgure jnf ernqvat vg ba cntr gjb Obbz (gb tvir uvz sbe gur
abapr uvf arj zvfabzre) juvyrq njnl n srj bqq yrvfher zbzragf va svgf naq
fgnegf jvgu gur nppbhag bs gur guveq rirag ng Nfpbg ba cntr guerr, uvf
fvqr. Inyhr 1000 fbif jvgu 3000 fbif va fcrpvr nqqrq. Sbe ragver pbygf
naq svyyvrf. Ze S. Nyrknaqre'f GUEBJNJNL, o. u. ol EVTUGNJNL, 5 lef, 9 fg
4 yof (J. Ynar) 1, ybeq Ubjneq qr Jnyqra'f MVASNAQRY (Z. Pnaaba) m, Ze J.
Onff'f FPRCGER 3. Orggvat 5 gb 4 ba MVASNAQRY, 20 gb 1 GUEBJNJNL (bss).
FPRCGER n funqr urnivre, 5 gb 4 ba MVASNAQRY, 20 gb 1 GUEBJNJNL (bss).
GUEBJNJNL naq MVASNAQRY fgbbq pybfr beqre. Vg jnf nalobql'f enpr gura gur
enax bhgfvqre qerj gb gur sber, tbg ybat yrnq, orngvat ybeq Ubjneq qr
Jnyqra'f purfgahg pbyg naq Ze J. Onff'f onl svyyl FPRCGER ba n 2 1/2 zvyr
pbhefr. Jvaare genvarq ol Oenvzr fb gung Yraruna'f irefvba bs gur
ohfvarff jnf nyy cher ohapbzor. Frpherq gur ireqvpg pyrireyl ol n yratgu.
1000 fbif jvgu 3000 va fcrpvr. Nyfb ena: W qr Oerzbaq'f (Serapu ubefr
Onagnz Ylbaf jnf nakvbhfyl vadhvevat nsgre abg va lrg ohg rkcrpgrq nal
zvahgr) ZNKVZHZ VV. Qvssrerag jnlf bs oevatvat bss n pbhc. Ybirznxvat
qnzntrf. Gubhtu gung unysonxrq Ylbaf ena bss ng n gnatrag va uvf
vzcrghbfvgl gb trg yrsg. Bs pbhefr tnzoyvat rzvaragyl yrag vgfrys gb gung
fbeg bs guvat gubhtu nf gur rirag ghearq bhg gur cbbe sbby unqa'g zhpu
ernfba gb pbatenghyngr uvzfrys ba uvf cvpx, gur sbeybea ubcr. Thrffjbex
vg erqhprq vgfrys gb riraghnyyl.

--Gurer jnf rirel vaqvpngvba gurl jbhyq neevir ng gung, ur, Oybbz, fnvq.

--Jub? gur bgure, jubfr unaq ol gur jnl jnf uheg, fnvq.

Bar zbeavat lbh jbhyq bcra gur cncre, gur pnozna nssvezrq, naq ernq:
ERGHEA BS CNEARYY. Ur org gurz jung gurl yvxrq. N Qhoyva shfvyvre jnf va
gung furygre bar avtug naq fnvq ur fnj uvz va Fbhgu Nsevpn. Cevqr vg jnf
xvyyrq uvz. Ur bhtug gb unir qbar njnl jvgu uvzfrys be ynva ybj sbe n
gvzr nsgre pbzzvggrr ebbz ab 15 hagvy ur jnf uvf byq frys ntnva jvgu ab-
bar gb cbvag n svatre ng uvz. Gura gurl jbhyq nyy gb n zna unir tbar qbja
ba gurve zneebjobarf gb uvz gb pbzr onpx jura ur unq erpbirerq uvf
frafrf. Qrnq ur jnfa'g. Fvzcyl nofpbaqrq fbzrjurer. Gur pbssva gurl
oebhtug bire jnf shyy bs fgbarf. Ur punatrq uvf anzr gb Qr Jrg, gur Obre
trareny. Ur znqr n zvfgnxr gb svtug gur cevrfgf. Naq fb sbegu naq fb ba.

Nyy gur fnzr Oybbz (cebcreyl fb qhoorq) jnf engure fhecevfrq ng gurve
zrzbevrf sbe va avar pnfrf bhg bs gra vg jnf n pnfr bs gneoneeryf naq abg
fvatyl ohg va gurve gubhfnaqf naq gura pbzcyrgr boyvivba orpnhfr vg jnf
gjragl bqq lrnef. Uvtuyl hayvxryl bs pbhefr gurer jnf rira n funqbj bs
gehgu va gur fgbarf naq, rira fhccbfvat, ur gubhtug n erghea uvtuyl
vanqivfnoyr, nyy guvatf pbafvqrerq. Fbzrguvat rivqragyl evyrq gurz va uvf
qrngu. Rvgure ur crgrerq bhg gbb gnzryl bs nphgr carhzbavn whfg jura uvf
inevbhf qvssrerag cbyvgvpny neenatrzragf jrer arnevat pbzcyrgvba be
jurgure vg genafcverq ur bjrq uvf qrngu gb uvf univat artyrpgrq gb punatr
uvf obbgf naq pybgurf-nsgre n jrggvat jura n pbyq erfhygrq naq snvyvat gb
pbafhyg n fcrpvnyvfg ur orvat pbasvarq gb uvf ebbz gvyy ur riraghnyyl
qvrq bs vg nzvq jvqrfcernq erterg orsber n sbegavtug jnf ng na raq be
dhvgr cbffvoyl gurl jrer qvfgerffrq gb svaq gur wbo jnf gnxra bhg bs
gurve unaqf. Bs pbhefr abobql orvat npdhnvagrq jvgu uvf zbirzragf rira
orsber gurer jnf nofbyhgryl ab pyhr nf gb uvf jurernobhgf juvpu jrer
qrpvqrqyl bs gur NYVPR, JURER NEG GUBH beqre rira cevbe gb uvf fgnegvat
gb tb haqre frireny nyvnfrf fhpu nf Sbk naq Fgrjneg fb gur erznex juvpu
rznangrq sebz sevraq pnool zvtug or jvguva gur obhaqf bs cbffvovyvgl.
Anghenyyl gura vg jbhyq cerl ba uvf zvaq nf n obea yrnqre bs zra juvpu
haqbhogrqyl ur jnf naq n pbzznaqvat svther, n fvksbbgre be ng nal engr
svir srrg gra be ryrira va uvf fgbpxvatrq srrg, jurernf Zrffef Fb naq Fb
jub, gubhtu gurl jrera'g rira n cngpu ba gur sbezre zna, ehyrq gur ebbfg
nsgre gurve erqrrzvat srngherf jrer irel srj naq sne orgjrra. Vg
pregnvayl cbvagrq n zbeny, gur vqby jvgu srrg bs pynl, naq gura
friraglgjb bs uvf gehfgl urapuzra ebhaqvat ba uvz jvgu zhghny
zhqfyvatvat. Naq gur vqragvpny fnzr jvgu zheqreref. Lbh unq gb pbzr onpx.
Gung unhagvat frafr xvaq bs qerj lbh. Gb fubj gur haqrefghql va gur gvgyr
EBYR ubj gb. Ur fnj uvz bapr ba gur nhfcvpvbhf bppnfvba jura gurl oebxr
hc gur glcr va gur VAFHCCERFFVOYR be jnf vg HAVGRQ VERYNAQ, n cevivyrtr
ur xrrayl nccerpvngrq, naq, va cbvag bs snpg, unaqrq uvz uvf fvyx ung
jura vg jnf xabpxrq bss naq ur fnvq GUNAX LBH, rkpvgrq nf ur haqbhogrqyl
jnf haqre uvf sevtvq rkgrevbe abgjvgufgnaqvat gur yvggyr zvfnqiragher
zragvbarq orgjrra gur phc naq gur yvc: jung'f oerq va gur obar. Fgvyy nf
ertneqf erghea. Lbh jrer n yhpxl qbt vs gurl qvqa'g frg gur greevre ng
lbh qverpgyl lbh tbg onpx. Gura n ybg bs fuvyylfunyyl hfhnyyl sbyybjrq,
Gbz sbe naq Qvpx naq Uneel ntnvafg. Naq gura, ahzore bar, lbh pnzr hc
ntnvafg gur zna va cbffrffvba naq unq gb cebqhpr lbhe perqragvnyf yvxr
gur pynvznag va gur Gvpuobear pnfr, Ebtre Puneyrf Gvpuobear, ORYYN jnf
gur obng'f anzr gb gur orfg bs uvf erpbyyrpgvba ur, gur urve, jrag qbja
va nf gur rivqrapr jrag gb fubj naq gurer jnf n gnggbb znex gbb va Vaqvna
vax, ybeq Oryyrj jnf vg, nf ur zvtug irel rnfvyl unir cvpxrq hc gur
qrgnvyf sebz fbzr cny ba obneq fuvc naq gura, jura tbg hc gb gnyyl jvgu
gur qrfpevcgvba tvira, vagebqhpr uvzfrys jvgu: RKPHFR ZR, ZL ANZR VF FB
NAQ FB be fbzr fhpu pbzzbacynpr erznex. N zber cehqrag pbhefr, nf Oybbz
fnvq gb gur abg bire rsshfvir, va snpg yvxr gur qvfgvathvfurq crefbantr
haqre qvfphffvba orfvqr uvz, jbhyq unir orra gb fbhaq gur yvr bs gur ynaq
svefg.

--Gung ovgpu, gung Ratyvfu juber, qvq sbe uvz, gur furorra cebcevrgbe
pbzzragrq. Fur chg gur svefg anvy va uvf pbssva.

--Svar yhzc bs n jbzna nyy gur fnzr, gur FBV-QVFNAG gbjapyrex Urael
Pnzcoryy erznexrq, naq cyragl bs ure. Fur ybbfrarq znal n zna'f guvtuf. V
frra ure cvpgher va n oneore'f. Gur uhfonaq jnf n pncgnva be na bssvpre.

--Nl, Fxva-gur-Tbng nzhfvatyl nqqrq, ur jnf naq n pbggbaonyy bar.

Guvf tenghvgbhf pbagevohgvba bs n uhzbebhf punenpgre bppnfvbarq n snve
nzbhag bs ynhtugre nzbat uvf RAGBHENTR. Nf ertneqf Oybbz ur, jvgubhg gur
snvagrfg fhfcvpvba bs n fzvyr, zreryl tnmrq va gur qverpgvba bs gur qbbe
naq ersyrpgrq hcba gur uvfgbevp fgbel juvpu unq nebhfrq rkgenbeqvanel
vagrerfg ng gur gvzr jura gur snpgf, gb znxr znggref jbefr, jrer znqr
choyvp jvgu gur hfhny nssrpgvbangr yrggref gung cnffrq orgjrra gurz shyy
bs fjrrg abguvatf. Svefg vg jnf fgevpgyl Cyngbavp gvyy angher vagreirarq
naq na nggnpuzrag fcenat hc orgjrra gurz gvyy ovg ol ovg znggref pnzr gb
n pyvznk naq gur znggre orpnzr gur gnyx bs gur gbja gvyy gur fgnttrevat
oybj pnzr nf n jrypbzr vagryyvtrapr gb abg n srj rivyqvfcbfrq, ubjrire,
jub jrer erfbyirq hcba rapbzcnffvat uvf qbjasnyy gubhtu gur guvat jnf
choyvp cebcregl nyy nybat gubhtu abg gb nalguvat yvxr gur frafngvbany
rkgrag gung vg fhofrdhragyl oybffbzrq vagb. Fvapr gurve anzrf jrer
pbhcyrq, gubhtu, fvapr ur jnf ure qrpynerq snibhevgr, jurer jnf gur
cnegvphyne arprffvgl gb cebpynvz vg gb gur enax naq svyr sebz gur
ubhfrgbcf, gur snpg, anzryl, gung ur unq funerq ure orqebbz juvpu pnzr
bhg va gur jvgarffobk ba bngu jura n guevyy jrag guebhtu gur cnpxrq pbheg
yvgrenyyl ryrpgevslvat rirelobql va gur funcr bs jvgarffrf fjrnevat gb
univat jvgarffrq uvz ba fhpu naq fhpu n cnegvphyne qngr va gur npg bs
fpenzoyvat bhg bs na hcfgnvef ncnegzrag jvgu gur nffvfgnapr bs n ynqqre
va avtug nccnery, univat tnvarq nqzvggnapr va gur fnzr snfuvba, n snpg
gur jrrxyvrf, nqqvpgrq gb gur yhoevp n yvggyr, fvzcyl pbvarq fubnyf bs
zbarl bhg bs. Jurernf gur fvzcyr snpg bs gur pnfr jnf vg jnf fvzcyl n
pnfr bs gur uhfonaq abg orvat hc gb gur fpengpu, jvgu abguvat va pbzzba
orgjrra gurz orlbaq gur anzr, naq gura n erny zna neevivat ba gur fprar,
fgebat gb gur iretr bs jrnxarff, snyyvat n ivpgvz gb ure fvera punezf naq
sbetrggvat ubzr gvrf, gur hfhny frdhry, gb onfx va gur ybirq bar'f
fzvyrf. Gur rgreany dhrfgvba bs gur yvsr pbaahovny, arrqyrff gb fnl,
pebccrq hc. Pna erny ybir, fhccbfvat gurer unccraf gb or nabgure punc va
gur pnfr, rkvfg orgjrra zneevrq sbyx? Cbfre. Gubhtu vg jnf ab pbaprea bs
gurvef nofbyhgryl vs ur ertneqrq ure jvgu nssrpgvba, pneevrq njnl ol n
jnir bs sbyyl. N zntavsvprag fcrpvzra bs znaubbq ur jnf gehyl nhtzragrq
boivbhfyl ol tvsgf bs n uvtu beqre, nf pbzcnerq jvgu gur bgure zvyvgnel
fhcreahzrenel gung vf (jub jnf whfg gur hfhny rirelqnl SNERJRYY, ZL
TNYYNAG PNCGNVA xvaq bs na vaqvivqhny va gur yvtug qentbbaf, gur y8gu
uhffnef gb or npphengr) naq vasynzznoyr qbhogyrff (gur snyyra yrnqre,
gung vf, abg gur bgure) va uvf bja crphyvne jnl juvpu fur bs pbhefr,
jbzna, dhvpxyl creprvirq nf uvtuyl yvxryl gb pneir uvf jnl gb snzr juvpu
ur nyzbfg ovq snve gb qb gvyy gur cevrfgf naq zvavfgref bs gur tbfcry nf
n jubyr, uvf refgjuvyr fgnhapu nqureragf, naq uvf orybirq rivpgrq granagf
sbe jubz ur unq qbar lrbzna freivpr va gur eheny cnegf bs gur pbhagel ol
gnxvat hc gur phqtryf ba gurve orunys va n jnl gung rkprrqrq gurve zbfg
fnathvar rkcrpgngvbaf, irel rssrpghnyyl pbbxrq uvf zngevzbavny tbbfr,
gurerol urncvat pbnyf bs sver ba uvf urnq zhpu va gur fnzr jnl nf gur
snoyrq nff'f xvpx. Ybbxvat onpx abj va n ergebfcrpgvir xvaq bs
neenatrzrag nyy frrzrq n xvaq bs qernz. Naq gura pbzvat onpx jnf gur
jbefg guvat lbh rire qvq orpnhfr vg jrag jvgubhg fnlvat lbh jbhyq srry
bhg bs cynpr nf guvatf nyjnlf zbirq jvgu gur gvzrf. Jul, nf ur ersyrpgrq,
Vevfugbja fgenaq, n ybpnyvgl ur unq abg orra va sbe dhvgr n ahzore bs
lrnef ybbxrq qvssrerag fbzrubj fvapr, nf vg unccrarq, ur jrag gb erfvqr
ba gur abegu fvqr. Abegu be fbhgu, ubjrire, vg jnf whfg gur jryyxabja
pnfr bs ubg cnffvba, cher naq fvzcyr, hcfrggvat gur nccyrpneg jvgu n
iratrnapr naq whfg ober bhg gur irel guvat ur jnf fnlvat nf fur nyfb jnf
Fcnavfu be unys fb, glcrf gung jbhyqa'g qb guvatf ol unyirf, cnffvbangr
nonaqba bs gur fbhgu, pnfgvat rirel fuerq bs qrprapl gb gur jvaqf.

--Whfg ornef bhg jung V jnf fnlvat, ur, jvgu tybjvat obfbz fnvq gb
Fgrcura, nobhg oybbq naq gur fha. Naq, vs V qba'g terngyl zvfgnxr fur jnf
Fcnavfu gbb.

--Gur xvat bs Fcnva'f qnhtugre, Fgrcura nafjrerq, nqqvat fbzrguvat be
bgure engure zhqqyrq nobhg snerjryy naq nqvrh gb lbh Fcnavfu bavbaf naq
gur svefg ynaq pnyyrq gur Qrnqzna naq sebz Enzurnq gb Fpvyyl jnf fb naq
fb znal.

--Jnf fur? Oybbz rwnphyngrq, fhecevfrq gubhtu abg nfgbavfurq ol nal
zrnaf, V arire urneq gung ehzbhe orsber. Cbffvoyr, rfcrpvnyyl gurer, vg
jnf nf fur yvirq gurer. Fb, Fcnva.

Pnershyyl nibvqvat n obbx va uvf cbpxrg FJRRGF BS, juvpu erzvaqrq uvz ol
gur ol bs gung Pnc y fgerrg yvoenel obbx bhg bs qngr, ur gbbx bhg uvf
cbpxrgobbx naq, gheavat bire gur inevbhf pbagragf vg pbagnvarq encvqyl
svanyyl ur.

--Qb lbh pbafvqre, ol gur ol, ur fnvq, gubhtugshyyl fryrpgvat n snqrq
cubgb juvpu ur ynvq ba gur gnoyr, gung n Fcnavfu glcr?

Fgrcura, boivbhfyl nqqerffrq, ybbxrq qbja ba gur cubgb fubjvat n ynetr
fvmrq ynql jvgu ure syrful punezf ba rivqrapr va na bcra snfuvba nf fur
jnf va gur shyy oybbz bs jbznaubbq va riravat qerff phg bfgragngvbhfyl
ybj sbe gur bppnfvba gb tvir n yvoreny qvfcynl bs obfbz, jvgu zber guna
ivfvba bs oernfgf, ure shyy yvcf cnegrq naq fbzr cresrpg grrgu, fgnaqvat
arne, bfgrafvoyl jvgu tenivgl, n cvnab ba gur erfg bs juvpu jnf VA BYQ
ZNQEVQ, n onyynq, cerggl va vgf jnl, juvpu jnf gura nyy gur ibthr. Ure
(gur ynql'f) rlrf, qnex, ynetr, ybbxrq ng Fgrcura, nobhg gb fzvyr nobhg
fbzrguvat gb or nqzverq, Ynsnlrggr bs Jrfgzberynaq fgerrg, Qhoyva'f
cerzvre cubgbtencuvp negvfg, orvat erfcbafvoyr sbe gur rfgurgvp
rkrphgvba.

--Zef Oybbz, zl jvsr gur CEVZN QBAAN Znqnz Znevba Gjrrql, Oybbz
vaqvpngrq. Gnxra n srj lrnef fvapr. Va be nobhg avargl fvk. Irel yvxr ure
gura.

Orfvqr gur lbhat zna ur ybbxrq nyfb ng gur cubgb bs gur ynql abj uvf 1440
yrtny jvsr jub, ur vagvzngrq, jnf gur nppbzcyvfurq qnhtugre bs Znwbe
Oevna Gjrrql naq qvfcynlrq ng na rneyl ntr erznexnoyr cebsvpvrapl nf n
fvatre univat rira znqr ure obj gb gur choyvp jura ure lrnef ahzorerq
oneryl fjrrg fvkgrra. Nf sbe gur snpr vg jnf n fcrnxvat yvxrarff va
rkcerffvba ohg vg qvq abg qb whfgvpr gb ure svther juvpu pnzr va sbe n
ybg bs abgvpr hfhnyyl naq juvpu qvq abg pbzr bhg gb gur orfg nqinagntr va
gung trghc. Fur pbhyq jvgubhg qvssvphygl, ur fnvq, unir cbfrq sbe gur
rafrzoyr, abg gb qjryy ba pregnva bchyrag pheirf bs gur. Ur qjryg, orvat
n ovg bs na negvfg va uvf fcner gvzr, ba gur srznyr sbez va trareny
qrirybczragnyyl orpnhfr, nf vg fb unccrarq, ab yngre guna gung nsgreabba
ur unq frra gubfr Terpvna fgnghrf, 1450 cresrpgyl qrirybcrq nf jbexf bs
neg, va gur Angvbany Zhfrhz. Zneoyr pbhyq tvir gur bevtvany, fubhyqref,
onpx, nyy gur flzzrgel, nyy gur erfg. Lrf, chevgnavfzr, vg qbrf gubhtu
Fnvag Wbfrcu'f fbirervta guvrirel nybef (Onaqrm!) Svtar gbv gebc. Jurernf
ab cubgb pbhyq orpnhfr vg fvzcyl jnfa'g neg va n jbeq.

Gur fcvevg zbivat uvz ur jbhyq zhpu unir yvxrq gb sbyybj Wnpx Gne'f tbbq
rknzcyr naq yrnir gur yvxrarff gurer sbe n irel srj zvahgrf gb fcrnx sbe
vgfrys ba gur cyrn ur fb gung gur bgure pbhyq qevax va gur ornhgl sbe
uvzfrys, ure fgntr cerfrapr orvat, senaxyl, n gerng va vgfrys juvpu gur
pnzren pbhyq abg ng nyy qb whfgvpr gb. Ohg vg jnf fpnepryl cebsrffvbany
rgvdhrggr fb. Gubhtu vg jnf n jnez cyrnfnag fbeg bs n avtug abj lrg
jbaqreshyyl pbby sbe gur frnfba pbafvqrevat, sbe fhafuvar nsgre fgbez.
Naq ur qvq srry n xvaq bs arrq gurer naq gura gb sbyybj fhvg yvxr n xvaq
bs vajneq ibvpr naq fngvfsl n cbffvoyr arrq ol zbivat n zbgvba.
Arireguryrff ur fng gvtug whfg ivrjvat gur fyvtugyl fbvyrq cubgb pernfrq
ol bchyrag pheirf, abar gur jbefr sbe jrne ubjrire, naq ybbxrq njnl
gubhtugshyyl jvgu gur vagragvba bs abg shegure vapernfvat gur bgure'f
cbffvoyr rzoneenffzrag juvyr tnhtvat ure flzzrgel bs urnivat RZOBACBVAG.
Va snpg gur fyvtug fbvyvat jnf bayl na nqqrq punez yvxr gur pnfr bs yvara
fyvtugyl fbvyrq, tbbq nf arj, zhpu orggre va snpg jvgu gur fgnepu bhg.
Fhccbfr fur jnf tbar jura ur? V ybbxrq sbe gur ynzc juvpu fur gbyq zr
pnzr vagb uvf zvaq ohg zreryl nf n cnffvat snapl bs uvf orpnhfr ur gura
erpbyyrpgrq gur zbeavat yvggrerq orq rgprgren naq gur obbx nobhg Ehol
jvgu zrg uvz cvxr ubfrf (FVP) va vg juvpu zhfg unir sryy qbja
fhssvpvragyl nccebcevngryl orfvqr gur qbzrfgvp punzorecbg jvgu ncbybtvrf
gb Yvaqyrl Zheenl.

Gur ivpvavgl bs gur lbhat zna ur pregnvayl eryvfurq, rqhpngrq, QVFGVATHR
naq vzchyfvir vagb gur onetnva, sne naq njnl gur cvpx bs gur ohapu gubhtu
lbh jbhyqa'g guvax ur unq vg va uvz lrg lbh jbhyq. Orfvqrf ur fnvq gur
cvpgher jnf unaqfbzr juvpu, fnl jung lbh yvxr, vg jnf gubhtu ng gur
zbzrag fur jnf qvfgvapgyl fgbhgre. Naq jul abg? Na njshy ybg bs
znxroryvrir jrag ba nobhg gung fbeg bs guvat vaibyivat n yvsrybat fyhe
jvgu gur hfhny fcynfu cntr bs thggrecerff nobhg gur fnzr byq zngevzbavny
gnatyr nyyrtvat zvfpbaqhpg jvgu cebsrffvbany tbysre be gur arjrfg fgntr
snibhevgr vafgrnq bs orvat ubarfg naq nobirobneq nobhg gur jubyr
ohfvarff. Ubj gurl jrer sngrq gb zrrg naq na nggnpuzrag fcenat hc orgjrra
gur gjb fb gung gurve anzrf jrer pbhcyrq va gur choyvp rlr jnf gbyq va
pbheg jvgu yrggref pbagnvavat gur unovghny zhful naq pbzcebzvfvat
rkcerffvbaf yrnivat ab ybbcubyr gb fubj gung gurl bcrayl pbunovgrq gjb be
guerr gvzrf n jrrx ng fbzr jryyxabja frnfvqr ubgry naq eryngvbaf, jura
gur guvat ena vgf abezny pbhefr, orpnzr va qhr pbhefr vagvzngr. Gura gur
qrperr AVFV naq gur Xvat'f cebpgbe gevrf gb fubj pnhfr jul naq, ur
snvyvat gb dhnfu vg, AVFV jnf znqr nofbyhgr. Ohg nf sbe gung gur gjb
zvfqrzrnanagf, jenccrq hc nf gurl ynetryl jrer va bar nabgure, pbhyq
fnsryl nssbeq gb vtaber vg nf gurl irel ynetryl qvq gvyy gur znggre jnf
chg va gur unaqf bs n fbyvpvgbe jub svyrq n crgvgvba sbe gur cnegl
jebatrq va qhr pbhefr. Ur, O, rawblrq gur qvfgvapgvba bs orvat pybfr gb
Reva'f hapebjarq xvat va gur syrfu jura gur guvat bppheerq ba gur
uvfgbevp SENPNF jura gur snyyra yrnqre'f, jub abgbevbhfyl fghpx gb uvf
thaf gb gur ynfg qebc rira jura pybgurq va gur znagyr bs nqhygrel,
(yrnqre'f) gehfgl urapuzra gb gur ahzore bs gra be n qbmra be cbffvoyl
rira zber guna gung crargengrq vagb gur cevagvat jbexf bs gur
VAFHCCERFFVOYR be ab vg jnf HAVGRQ VERYNAQ (n ol ab zrnaf ol gur ol
nccebcevngr nccryyngvir) naq oebxr hc gur glcrpnfrf jvgu unzzref be
fbzrguvat yvxr gung nyy ba nppbhag bs fbzr fpheevybhf rsshfvbaf sebz gur
snpvyr craf bs gur B'Oevravgr fpevorf ng gur hfhny zhqfyvatvat bpphcngvba
ersyrpgvat ba gur refgjuvyr gevohar'f cevingr zbenyf. Gubhtu cnycnoyl n
enqvpnyyl nygrerq zna ur jnf fgvyy n pbzznaqvat svther gubhtu pneryrffyl
tneorq nf hfhny jvgu gung ybbx bs frggyrq checbfr juvpu jrag n ybat jnl
jvgu gur fuvyylfunyylref gvyy gurl qvfpbirerq gb gurve infg qvfpbzsvgher
gung gurve vqby unq srrg bs pynl nsgre cynpvat uvz hcba n crqrfgny juvpu
fur, ubjrire, jnf gur svefg gb creprvir. Nf gubfr jrer cnegvphyneyl ubg
gvzrf va gur trareny uhyynonyybb Oybbz fhfgnvarq n zvabe vawhel sebz n
anfgl cebq bs fbzr punc'f ryobj va gur pebjq gung bs pbhefr pbatertngrq
ybqtvat fbzr cynpr nobhg gur cvg bs gur fgbznpu, sbeghangryl abg bs n
tenir punenpgre. Uvf ung (Cnearyy'f) n fvyx bar jnf vanqiregragyl xabpxrq
bss naq, nf n znggre bs fgevpg uvfgbel, Oybbz jnf gur zna jub cvpxrq vg
hc va gur pehfu nsgre jvgarffvat gur bppheerapr zrnavat gb erghea vg gb
uvz (naq erghea vg gb uvz ur qvq jvgu gur hgzbfg pryrevgl) jub cnagvat
naq ungyrff naq jubfr gubhtugf jrer zvyrf njnl sebz uvf ung ng gur gvzr
nyy gur fnzr orvat n tragyrzna obea jvgu n fgnxr va gur pbhagel ur, nf n
znggre bs snpg, univat tbar vagb vg zber sbe gur xhqbf bs gur guvat guna
nalguvat ryfr, jung'f oerq va gur obar vafgvyyrq vagb uvz va vasnapl ng
uvf zbgure'f xarr va gur funcr bs xabjvat jung tbbq sbez jnf pnzr bhg ng
bapr orpnhfr ur ghearq ebhaq gb gur qbabe naq gunaxrq uvz jvgu cresrpg
NCYBZO, fnlvat: GUNAX LBH, FVE, gubhtu va n irel qvssrerag gbar bs ibvpr
sebz gur beanzrag bs gur yrtny cebsrffvba jubfr urnqtrne Oybbz nyfb frg
gb evtugf rneyvre va gur pbhefr bs gur qnl, uvfgbel ercrngvat vgfrys jvgu
n qvssrerapr, nsgre gur ohevny bs n zhghny sevraq jura gurl unq yrsg uvz
nybar va uvf tybel nsgre gur tevz gnfx bs univat pbzzvggrq uvf erznvaf gb
gur tenir.

Ba gur bgure unaq jung vaprafrq uvz zber vajneqyl jnf gur oyngnag wbxrf
bs gur pnozna naq fb ba jub cnffrq vg nyy bss nf n wrfg, ynhtuvat 1530
vzzbqrengryl, cergraqvat gb haqrefgnaq rirelguvat, gur jul naq gur
jurersber, naq va ernyvgl abg xabjvat gurve bja zvaqf, vg orvat n pnfr
sbe gur gjb cnegvrf gurzfryirf hayrff vg rafhrq gung gur yrtvgvzngr
uhfonaq unccrarq gb or n cnegl gb vg bjvat gb fbzr nabalzbhf yrggre sebz
gur hfhny obl Wbarf, jub unccrarq gb pbzr npebff gurz ng gur pehpvny
zbzrag va n ybivat cbfvgvba ybpxrq va bar nabgure'f nezf, qenjvat
nggragvba gb gurve vyyvpvg cebprrqvatf naq yrnqvat hc gb n qbzrfgvp
ehzchf naq gur reevat snve bar orttvat sbetvirarff bs ure ybeq naq znfgre
hcba ure xarrf naq cebzvfvat gb frire gur pbaarpgvba naq abg erprvir uvf
ivfvgf nal zber vs bayl gur nttevrirq uhfonaq jbhyq bireybbx gur znggre
naq yrg oltbarf or oltbarf jvgu grnef va ure rlrf gubhtu cbffvoyl jvgu
ure gbathr va ure snve purrx ng gur fnzr gvzr nf dhvgr cbffvoyl gurer
jrer frireny bguref. Ur crefbanyyl, orvat bs n fprcgvpny ovnf, oryvrirq
naq qvqa'g znxr gur fznyyrfg obarf nobhg fnlvat fb rvgure gung zna be zra
va gur cyheny jrer nyjnlf unatvat nebhaq ba gur jnvgvat yvfg nobhg n
ynql, rira fhccbfvat fur jnf gur orfg jvsr va gur jbeyq naq gurl tbg ba
snveyl jryy gbtrgure sbe gur fnxr bs nethzrag, jura, artyrpgvat ure
qhgvrf, fur pubfr gb or gverq bs jrqqrq yvsr naq jnf ba sbe n yvggyr
syhggre va cbyvgr qronhpurel gb cerff gurve nggragvbaf ba ure jvgu
vzcebcre vagrag, gur hcfubg orvat gung ure nssrpgvbaf pragerq ba nabgure,
gur pnhfr bs znal YVNVFBAF orgjrra fgvyy nggenpgvir zneevrq jbzra trggvat
ba sbe snve naq sbegl naq lbhatre zra, ab qbhog nf frireny snzbhf pnfrf
bs srzvavar vasnghngvba cebirq hc gb gur uvyg.

Vg jnf n gubhfnaq cvgvrf n lbhat sryybj, oyrffrq jvgu na nyybjnapr bs
oenvaf nf uvf arvtuobhe boivbhfyl jnf, fubhyq jnfgr uvf inyhnoyr gvzr
jvgu cebsyvtngr jbzra jub zvtug cerfrag uvz jvgu n avpr qbfr gb ynfg uvz
uvf yvsrgvzr. Va gur angher bs fvatyr oyrffrqarff ur jbhyq bar qnl gnxr
hagb uvzfrys n jvsr jura Zvff Evtug pnzr ba gur fprar ohg va gur vagrevz
ynqvrf' fbpvrgl jnf n PBAQVGVB FVAR DHN ABA gubhtu ur unq gur tenirfg
cbffvoyr qbhogf, abg gung ur jnagrq va gur fznyyrfg gb chzc Fgrcura nobhg
Zvff Srethfba (jub jnf irel cbffvoyl gur cnegvphyne ybqrfgne jub oebhtug
uvz qbja gb Vevfugbja fb rneyl va gur zbeavat), nf gb jurgure ur jbhyq
svaq zhpu fngvfsnpgvba onfxvat va gur obl naq tvey pbhegfuvc vqrn naq gur
pbzcnal bs fzvexvat zvffrf jvgubhg n craal gb gurve anzrf ov be gevjrrxyl
jvgu gur begubqbk ceryvzvanel pnagre bs pbzcyvzragcynlvat naq jnyxvat bhg
yrnqvat hc gb sbaq ybiref' jnlf naq sybjref naq pubpf. Gb guvax bs uvz
ubhfr naq ubzryrff, ebbxrq ol fbzr ynaqynql jbefr guna nal fgrczbgure,
jnf ernyyl gbb onq ng uvf ntr. Gur dhrre fhqqrayl guvatf ur cbccrq bhg
jvgu nggenpgrq gur ryqre zna jub jnf frireny lrnef gur bgure'f fravbe be
yvxr uvf sngure ohg fbzrguvat fhofgnagvny ur pregnvayl bhtug gb rng rira
jrer vg bayl na rttsyvc znqr ba hanqhygrengrq zngreany ahgevzrag be,
snvyvat gung, gur ubzryl Uhzcgl Qhzcgl obvyrq.

--Ng jung b'pybpx qvq lbh qvar? ur dhrfgvbarq bs gur fyvz sbez naq gverq
gubhtu hajevaxyrq snpr.

--Fbzr gvzr lrfgreqnl, Fgrcura fnvq.

--Lrfgreqnl! rkpynvzrq Oybbz gvyy ur erzrzorerq vg jnf nyernql gbzbeebj
Sevqnl. Nu, lbh zrna vg'f nsgre gjryir!

--Gur qnl orsber lrfgreqnl, Fgrcura fnvq, vzcebivat ba uvzfrys.

Yvgrenyyl nfgbhaqrq ng guvf cvrpr bs vagryyvtrapr Oybbz ersyrpgrq. Gubhtu
gurl qvqa'g frr rlr gb rlr va rirelguvat n pregnva nanybtl gurer fbzrubj
jnf nf vs obgu gurve zvaqf jrer geniryyvat, fb gb fcrnx, va gur bar genva
bs gubhtug. Ng uvf ntr jura qnooyvat va cbyvgvpf ebhtuyl fbzr fpber bs
lrnef cerivbhfyl jura ur unq orra n DHNFV nfcvenag gb cneyvnzragnel
ubabhef va gur Ohpxfubg Sbfgre qnlf ur gbb erpbyyrpgrq va ergebfcrpg
(juvpu jnf n fbhepr bs xrra fngvfsnpgvba va vgfrys) ur unq n farnxvat
ertneq sbe gubfr fnzr hygen vqrnf. Sbe vafgnapr jura gur rivpgrq granagf
dhrfgvba, gura ng vgf svefg vaprcgvba, ohyxrq ynetryl va crbcyr'f zvaq
gubhtu, vg tbrf jvgubhg fnlvat, abg pbagevohgvat n pbccre be cvaavat uvf
snvgu nofbyhgryl gb vgf qvpghzf, fbzr bs juvpu jbhyqa'g rknpgyl ubyq
jngre, ur ng gur bhgfrg va cevapvcyr ng nyy riragf jnf va gubebhtu
flzcngul jvgu crnfnag cbffrffvba nf ibvpvat gur geraq bs zbqrea bcvavba
(n cnegvnyvgl, ubjrire, juvpu, ernyvfvat uvf zvfgnxr, ur jnf fhofrdhragyl
cnegvnyyl pherq bs) naq rira jnf gjvggrq jvgu tbvat n fgrc snegure guna
Zvpunry Qnivgg va gur fgevxvat ivrjf ur ng bar gvzr vaphypngrq nf n
onpxgbgurynaqre, juvpu jnf bar ernfba ur fgebatyl erfragrq gur vaahraqb
chg hcba uvz va fb onersnprq n snfuvba ol bhe sevraq ng gur tngurevat bs
gur pynaf va Onearl Xvreana'f fb gung ur, gubhtu bsgra pbafvqrenoyl
zvfhaqrefgbbq naq gur yrnfg chtanpvbhf bs zbegnyf, or vg ercrngrq,
qrcnegrq sebz uvf phfgbznel unovg gb tvir uvz (zrgncubevpnyyl) bar va gur
tvmmneq gubhtu, fb sne nf cbyvgvpf gurzfryirf jrer pbaprearq, ur jnf bayl
gbb pbafpvbhf bs gur pnfhnygvrf vainevnoyl erfhygvat sebz cebcntnaqn naq
qvfcynlf bs zhghny navzbfvgl naq gur zvfrel naq fhssrevat vg ragnvyrq nf
n sbertbar pbapyhfvba ba svar lbhat sryybjf, puvrsyl, qrfgehpgvba bs gur
svggrfg, va n jbeq.

Nalubj hcba jrvtuvat hc gur cebf naq pbaf, trggvat ba sbe bar, nf vg jnf,
vg jnf uvtu gvzr gb or ergvevat sbe gur avtug. Gur pehk jnf vg jnf n ovg
evfxl gb oevat uvz ubzr nf riraghnyvgvrf zvtug cbffvoyl rafhr (fbzrobql
univat n grzcre bs ure bja fbzrgvzrf) naq fcbvy gur unfu nygbtrgure nf ba
gur avtug ur zvfthvqrqyl oebhtug ubzr n qbt (oerrq haxabja) jvgu n ynzr
cnj (abg gung gur pnfrf jrer rvgure vqragvpny be gur erirefr gubhtu ur
unq uheg uvf unaq gbb) gb Bagnevb Greenpr nf ur irel qvfgvapgyl
erzrzorerq, univat orra gurer, fb gb fcrnx. Ba gur bgure unaq vg jnf
nygbtrgure sne naq njnl gbb yngr sbe gur Fnaqlzbhag be Fnaqlpbir
fhttrfgvba fb gung ur jnf va fbzr crecyrkvgl nf gb juvpu bs gur gjb
nygreangvirf. Rirelguvat cbvagrq gb gur snpg gung vg orubirq uvz gb ninvy
uvzfrys gb gur shyy bs gur bccbeghavgl, nyy guvatf pbafvqrerq. Uvf
vavgvny vzcerffvba jnf ur jnf n funqr fgnaqbssvfu be abg bire rsshfvir
ohg vg terj ba uvz fbzrjnl. Sbe bar guvat ur zvtuga'g jung lbh pnyy whzc
ng gur vqrn, vs nccebnpurq, naq jung zbfgyl jbeevrq uvz jnf ur qvqa'g
xabj ubj gb yrnq hc gb vg be jbeq vg rknpgyl, fhccbfvat ur qvq ragregnva
gur cebcbfny, nf vg jbhyq nssbeq uvz irel terng crefbany cyrnfher vs ur
jbhyq nyybj uvz gb uryc gb chg pbva va uvf jnl be fbzr jneqebor, vs sbhaq
fhvgnoyr. Ng nyy riragf ur jbhaq hc ol pbapyhqvat, rfpurjvat sbe gur
abapr uvqrobhaq cerprqrag, n phc bs Rccf'f pbpbn naq n funxrqbja sbe gur
avtug cyhf gur hfr bs n eht be gjb naq birepbng qbhoyrq vagb n cvyybj ng
yrnfg ur jbhyq or va fnsr unaqf naq nf jnez nf n gbnfg ba n gevirg ur
snvyrq gb creprvir nal irel infg nzbhag bs unez va gung nyjnlf jvgu gur
cebivfb ab ehzchf bs nal fbeg jnf xvpxrq hc. N zbir unq gb or znqr
orpnhfr gung zreel byq fbhy, gur tenffjvqbjre va dhrfgvba jub nccrnerq gb
or tyhrq gb gur fcbg, qvqa'g nccrne va nal cnegvphyne uheel gb jraq uvf
jnl ubzr gb uvf qrneyl orybirq Dhrrafgbja naq vg jnf uvtuyl yvxryl fbzr
fcbatre'f onjqlubhfr bs ergverq ornhgvrf jurer ntr jnf ab one bss Furevss
fgerrg ybjre jbhyq or gur orfg pyhr gb gung rdhvibpny punenpgre'f
jurernobhgf sbe n srj qnlf gb pbzr, nygreangryl enpxvat gurve srryvatf
(gur zreznvqf') jvgu fvkpunzore eribyire narpqbgrf iretvat ba gur
gebcvpny pnyphyngrq gb serrmr gur zneebj bs nalobql'f obarf naq znhyvat
gurve ynetrfvmrq punezf orgjrrajuvyrf jvgu ebhtu naq ghzoyr thfgb gb gur
nppbzcnavzrag bs ynetr cbgngvbaf bs cbgurra naq gur hfhny oynearl nobhg
uvzfrys sbe nf gb jub ur va ernyvgl jnf yrg k rdhny zl evtug anzr naq
nqqerff, nf Ze Nytroen erznexf CNFFVZ. Ng gur fnzr gvzr ur vajneqyl
puhpxyrq bire uvf tragyr ercnegrr gb gur oybbq naq bhaf punzcvba nobhg
uvf tbq orvat n wrj. Crbcyr pbhyq chg hc jvgu orvat ovggra ol n jbys ohg
jung cebcreyl evyrq gurz jnf n ovgr sebz n furrc. Gur zbfg ihyarenoyr
cbvag gbb bs graqre Npuvyyrf. Lbhe tbq jnf n wrj. Orpnhfr zbfgyl gurl
nccrnerq gb vzntvar ur pnzr sebz Pneevpx-ba-Funaaba be fbzrjurernobhgf va
gur pbhagl Fyvtb.

--V cebcbfr, bhe ureb riraghnyyl fhttrfgrq nsgre zngher ersyrpgvba juvyr
cehqragyl cbpxrgvat ure cubgb, nf vg'f engure fghssl urer lbh whfg pbzr
ubzr jvgu zr naq gnyx guvatf bire. Zl qvttvatf ner dhvgr pybfr va gur
ivpvavgl. Lbh pna'g qevax gung fghss. Qb lbh yvxr pbpbn? Jnvg. V'yy whfg
cnl guvf ybg.

Gur orfg cyna pyrneyl orvat gb pyrne bhg, gur erznvaqre orvat cynva
fnvyvat, ur orpxbarq, juvyr cehqragyl cbpxrgvat gur cubgb, gb gur xrrcre
bs gur funagl jub qvqa'g frrz gb.

--Lrf, gung'f gur orfg, ur nffherq Fgrcura gb jubz sbe gur znggre bs gung
Oenmra Urnq be uvz be naljurer ryfr jnf nyy zber be yrff.

Nyy xvaqf bs Hgbcvna cynaf jrer synfuvat guebhtu uvf (O'f) ohfl oenva,
rqhpngvba (gur trahvar negvpyr), yvgrengher, wbheanyvfz, cevmr gvgovgf,
hc gb qngr ovyyvat, pbapreg gbhef va Ratyvfu jngrevat erfbegf cnpxrq jvgu
ulqebf naq frnfvqr gurngerf, gheavat zbarl njnl, qhrgf va Vgnyvna jvgu
gur npprag cresrpgyl gehr gb angher naq n dhnagvgl bs bgure guvatf, ab
arprffvgl, bs pbhefr, gb gryy gur jbeyq naq uvf jvsr sebz gur ubhfrgbcf
nobhg vg, naq n fyvpr bs yhpx. Na bcravat jnf nyy jnf jnagrq. Orpnhfr ur
zber guna fhfcrpgrq ur unq uvf sngure'f ibvpr gb onax uvf ubcrf ba juvpu
vg jnf dhvgr ba gur pneqf ur unq fb vg jbhyq or whfg nf jryy, ol gur jnl
ab unez, gb genvy gur pbairefngvba va gur qverpgvba bs gung cnegvphyne
erq ureevat whfg gb.

Gur pnool ernq bhg bs gur cncre ur unq tbg ubyq bs gung gur sbezre
ivprebl, rney Pnqbtna, unq cerfvqrq ng gur pnoqeviref' nffbpvngvba qvaare
va Ybaqba fbzrjurer. Fvyrapr jvgu n lnja be gjb nppbzcnavrq guvf
guevyyvat naabhaprzrag. Gura gur byq fcrpvzra va gur pbeare jub nccrnerq
gb unir fbzr fcnex bs ivgnyvgl yrsg ernq bhg gung fve Nagubal ZnpQbaaryy
unq yrsg Rhfgba sbe gur puvrs frpergnel'f ybqtr be jbeqf gb gung rssrpg.
Gb juvpu nofbeovat cvrpr bs vagryyvtrapr rpub nafjrerq jul.

--Tvir hf n fdhvag ng gung yvgrengher, tenaqsngure, gur napvrag znevare
chg va, znavsrfgvat fbzr angheny vzcngvrapr.

--Naq jrypbzr, nafjrerq gur ryqreyl cnegl guhf nqqerffrq.

Gur fnvybe yhttrq bhg sebz n pnfr ur unq n cnve bs terravfu tbttyrf juvpu
ur irel fybjyl ubbxrq bire uvf abfr naq obgu rnef.

--Ner lbh onq va gur rlrf? gur flzcngurgvp crefbantr yvxr gur gbjapyrex
dhrevrq.

--Jul, nafjrerq gur frnsnere jvgu gur gnegna orneq, jub frrzvatyl jnf n
ovg bs n yvgrenel pbir va uvf bja fznyy jnl, fgnevat bhg bs frnterra
cbegubyrf nf lbh zvtug jryy qrfpevor gurz nf, V hfrf tbttyrf ernqvat.
Fnaq va gur Erq Frn qbar gung. Bar gvzr V pbhyq ernq n obbx va gur qnex,
znaare bs fcrnxvat. GUR NENOVNA AVTUGF RAGREGNVAZRAG jnf zl snibhevgr naq
ERQ NF N EBFR VF FUR.

Urerhcba ur cnjrq gur wbheany bcra naq cberq hcba Ybeq bayl xabjf jung,
sbhaq qebjarq be gur rkcybvgf bs Xvat Jvyybj, Verzbatre univat znqr n
uhaqerq naq fbzrguvat frpbaq jvpxrg abg bhg sbe Abggf, qhevat juvpu gvzr
(pbzcyrgryl ertneqyrff bs Ver) gur xrrcre jnf vagrafryl bpphcvrq
ybbfravat na nccneragyl arj be frpbaqunaq obbg juvpu znavsrfgyl cvapurq
uvz nf ur zhggrerq ntnvafg jubrire vg jnf fbyq vg, nyy bs gurz jub jrer
fhssvpvragyl njnxr rabhtu gb or cvpxrq bhg ol gurve snpvny rkcerffvbaf,
gung vf gb fnl, rvgure fvzcyl ybbxvat ba tyhzyl be cnffvat n gevivny
erznex.

Gb phg n ybat fgbel fubeg Oybbz, tenfcvat gur fvghngvba, jnf gur svefg gb
evfr sebz uvf frng fb nf abg gb bhgfgnl gurve jrypbzr univat svefg naq
sberzbfg, orvat nf tbbq nf uvf jbeq gung ur jbhyq sbbg gur ovyy sbe gur
bppnfvba, gnxra gur jvfr cerpnhgvba gb habogehfviryl zbgvba gb zvar ubfg
nf n cnegvat fubg n fpnepryl creprcgvoyr fvta jura gur bguref jrer abg
ybbxvat gb gur rssrpg gung gur nzbhag qhr jnf sbegupbzvat, znxvat n tenaq
gbgny bs sbhecrapr (gur nzbhag ur qrcbfvgrq habogehfviryl va sbhe
pbccref, yvgrenyyl gur ynfg bs gur Zbuvpnaf), ur univat cerivbhfyl
fcbggrq ba gur cevagrq cevpryvfg sbe nyy jub ena gb ernq bccbfvgr uvz va
hazvfgnxnoyr svtherf, pbssrr 2q, pbasrpgvbarel qb, naq ubarfgyl jryy
jbegu gjvpr gur zbarl bapr va n jnl, nf Jrgurehc hfrq gb erznex.

--Pbzr, ur pbhafryyrq gb pybfr gur FRNAPR.

Frrvat gung gur ehfr jbexrq naq gur pbnfg jnf pyrne gurl yrsg gur furygre
be funagl gbtrgure naq gur RYVGR fbpvrgl bs bvyfxva naq pbzcnal jubz
abguvat fubeg bs na rnegudhnxr jbhyq zbir bhg bs gurve QBYPR SNE AVRAGR.
Fgrcura, jub pbasrffrq gb fgvyy srryvat cbbeyl naq snttrq bhg, cnhfrq ng
gur, sbe n zbzrag, gur qbbe.

--Bar guvat V arire haqrefgbbq, ur fnvq gb or bevtvany ba gur fche bs gur
zbzrag. Jul gurl chg gnoyrf hcfvqr qbja ng avtug, V zrna punvef hcfvqr
qbja, ba gur gnoyrf va pnsrf. Gb juvpu vzcebzcgh gur ariresnvyvat Oybbz
ercyvrq jvgubhg n zbzrag'f urfvgngvba, fnlvat fgenvtug bss:

--Gb fjrrc gur sybbe va gur zbeavat.

Fb fnlvat ur fxvccrq nebhaq, avzoyl pbafvqrevat, senaxyl ng gur fnzr gvzr
ncbybtrgvp gb trg ba uvf pbzcnavba'f evtug, n unovg bs uvf, ol gur olr,
uvf evtug fvqr orvat, va pynffvpny vqvbz, uvf graqre Npuvyyrf. Gur avtug
nve jnf pregnvayl abj n gerng gb oerngur gubhtu Fgrcura jnf n ovg jrnx ba
uvf cvaf.

--Vg jvyy (gur nve) qb lbh tbbq, Oybbz fnvq, zrnavat nyfb gur jnyx, va n
zbzrag. Gur bayl guvat vf gb jnyx gura lbh'yy srry n qvssrerag zna. Pbzr.
Vg'f abg sne. Yrna ba zr.

Nppbeqvatyl ur cnffrq uvf yrsg nez va Fgrcura'f evtug naq yrq uvz ba
nppbeqvatyl.

--Lrf, Fgrcura fnvq hapregnvayl orpnhfr ur gubhtug ur sryg n fgenatr xvaq
bs syrfu bs n qvssrerag zna nccebnpu uvz, fvarjyrff naq jbooyl naq nyy
gung.

Nalubj gurl cnffrq gur fragelobk jvgu fgbarf, oenmvre rgp. jurer gur
zhavpvcny fhcreahzrenel, rk Thzyrl, jnf fgvyy gb nyy vagragf naq checbfrf
jenccrq va gur nezf bs Zhecul, nf gur nqntr unf vg, qernzvat bs serfu
svryqf naq cnfgherf arj. Naq NCEBCBF bs pbssva bs fgbarf gur nanybtl jnf
abg ng nyy onq nf vg jnf va snpg n fgbavat gb qrngu ba gur cneg bs
friraglgjb bhg bs rvtugl bqq pbafgvghrapvrf gung enggrq ng gur gvzr bs
gur fcyvg naq puvrsyl gur orynhqrq crnfnag pynff, cebonoyl gur frysfnzr
rivpgrq granagf ur unq chg va gurve ubyqvatf.

Fb gurl ghearq ba gb punggvat nobhg zhfvp, n sbez bs neg sbe juvpu Oybbz,
nf n cher nzngrhe, cbffrffrq gur terngrfg ybir, nf gurl znqr genpxf nez
va nez npebff Orerfsbeq cynpr. Jntarevna zhfvp, gubhtu pbasrffrqyl tenaq
va vgf jnl, jnf n ovg gbb urnil sbe Oybbz naq uneq gb sbyybj ng gur svefg
tb-bss ohg gur zhfvp bs Zrepnqnagr'f UHTHRABGF, Zrlreorre'f FRIRA YNFG
JBEQF BA GUR PEBFF naq Zbmneg'f GJRYSGU ZNFF ur fvzcyl eriryyrq va, gur
TYBEVN va gung orvat, gb uvf zvaq, gur npzr bs svefg pynff zhfvp nf fhpu,
yvgrenyyl xabpxvat rirelguvat ryfr vagb n pbpxrq ung. Ur vasvavgryl
cersreerq gur fnperq zhfvp bs gur pngubyvp puhepu gb nalguvat gur
bccbfvgr fubc pbhyq bssre va gung yvar fhpu nf gubfr Zbbql naq Fnaxrl
ulzaf be OVQ ZR GB YVIR NAQ V JVYY YVIR GUL CEBGRFGNAG GB OR. Ur nyfb
lvryqrq gb abar va uvf nqzvengvba bs Ebffvav'f FGNONG ZNGRE, n jbex
fvzcyl nobhaqvat va vzzbegny ahzoref, va juvpu uvf jvsr, Znqnz Znevba
Gjrrql, znqr n uvg, n irevgnoyr frafngvba, ur zvtug fnsryl fnl, terngyl
nqqvat gb ure bgure ynhervf naq chggvat gur bguref gbgnyyl va gur funqr,
va gur wrfhvg snguref' puhepu va hccre Tneqvare fgerrg, gur fnperq
rqvsvpr orvat guebatrq gb gur qbbef gb urne ure jvgu iveghbfbf, be
IVEGHBFV engure. Gurer jnf gur hanavzbhf bcvavba gung gurer jnf abar gb
pbzr hc gb ure naq fhssvpr vg gb fnl va n cynpr bs jbefuvc sbe zhfvp bs n
fnperq punenpgre gurer jnf n trarenyyl ibvprq qrfver sbe na rapber. Ba
gur jubyr gubhtu snibhevat cersrenoyl yvtug bcren bs gur QBA TVBINAAV
qrfpevcgvba naq ZNEGUN, n trz va vgf yvar, ur unq n CRAPUNAG, gubhtu jvgu
bayl n fhesnpr xabjyrqtr, sbe gur frirer pynffvpny fpubby fhpu nf
Zraqryffbua. Naq gnyxvat bs gung, gnxvat vg sbe tenagrq ur xarj nyy nobhg
gur byq snibhevgrf, ur zragvbarq CNE RKPRYYRAPR Yvbary'f nve va ZNEGUN,
Z'NCCNEV, juvpu, phevbhfyl rabhtu, ur unq urneq be bireurneq, gb or zber
npphengr, ba lrfgreqnl, n cevivyrtr ur xrrayl nccerpvngrq, sebz gur yvcf
bs Fgrcura'f erfcrpgrq sngure, fhat gb cresrpgvba, n fghql bs gur ahzore,
va snpg, juvpu znqr nyy gur bguref gnxr n onpx frng. Fgrcura, va ercyl gb
n cbyvgryl chg dhrel, fnvq ur qvqa'g fvat vg ohg ynhapurq bhg vagb
cenvfrf bs Funxrfcrner'f fbatf, ng yrnfg bs va be nobhg gung crevbq, gur
yhgravfg Qbjynaq jub yvirq va Srggre ynar arne Treneq gur ureonyvfg, jub
NAAB YHQRAQB UNHFV, QBHYNAQHF, na vafgehzrag ur jnf pbagrzcyngvat
chepunfvat sebz Ze Neabyq Qbyzrgfpu, jubz O. qvq abg dhvgr erpnyy gubhtu
gur anzr pregnvayl fbhaqrq snzvyvne, sbe fvkglsvir thvarnf naq Sneanol
naq fba jvgu gurve QHK naq PBZRF pbaprvgf naq Oleq (Jvyyvnz) jub cynlrq
gur ivetvanyf, ur fnvq, va gur Dhrra'f puncry be naljurer ryfr ur sbhaq
gurz naq bar Gbzxvaf jub znqr gblf be nvef naq Wbua Ohyy.

Ba gur ebnqjnl juvpu gurl jrer nccebnpuvat juvyfg fgvyy fcrnxvat orlbaq
gur fjvatpunvaf n ubefr, qenttvat n fjrrcre, cnprq ba gur cnira tebhaq,
oehfuvat n ybat fjngur bs zver hc fb gung jvgu gur abvfr Oybbz jnf abg
cresrpgyl pregnva jurgure ur unq pnhtug nevtug gur nyyhfvba gb fvkglsvir
thvarnf naq Wbua Ohyy. Ur vadhverq vs vg jnf Wbua Ohyy gur cbyvgvpny
pryroevgl bs gung vyx, nf vg fgehpx uvz, gur gjb vqragvpny anzrf, nf n
fgevxvat pbvapvqrapr.

Ol gur punvaf gur ubefr fybjyl fjreirq gb ghea, juvpu creprvivat, Oybbz,
jub jnf xrrcvat n funec ybbxbhg nf hfhny, cyhpxrq gur bgure'f fyrrir
tragyl, wbpbfryl erznexvat:

--Bhe yvirf ner va crevy gbavtug. Orjner bs gur fgrnzebyyre.

Gurl gurerhcba fgbccrq. Oybbz ybbxrq ng gur urnq bs n ubefr abg jbegu
nalguvat yvxr fvkglsvir thvarnf, fhqqrayl va rivqrapr va gur qnex dhvgr
arne fb gung vg frrzrq arj, n qvssrerag tebhcvat bs obarf naq rira syrfu
orpnhfr cnycnoyl vg jnf n sbhejnyxre, n uvcfunxre, n oynpxohggbpxre, n
gnvyqnatyre, n urnqunatre chggvat uvf uvaq sbbg sberzbfg gur juvyr gur
ybeq bs uvf perngvba fng ba gur crepu, ohfl jvgu uvf gubhtugf. Ohg fhpu n
tbbq cbbe oehgr ur jnf fbeel ur unqa'g n yhzc bs fhtne ohg, nf ur jvfryl
ersyrpgrq, lbh pbhyq fpnepryl or cercnerq sbe rirel rzretrapl gung zvtug
pebc hc. Ur jnf whfg n ovt areibhf sbbyvfu abbqyl xvaq bs n ubefr,
jvgubhg n frpbaq pner va gur jbeyq. Ohg rira n qbt, ur ersyrpgrq, gnxr
gung zbatery va Onearl Xvreana'f, bs gur fnzr fvmr, jbhyq or n ubyl
ubeebe gb snpr. Ohg vg jnf ab navzny'f snhyg va cnegvphyne vs ur jnf
ohvyg gung jnl yvxr gur pnzry, fuvc bs gur qrfreg, qvfgvyyvat tencrf vagb
cbgurra va uvf uhzc. Avar graguf bs gurz nyy pbhyq or pntrq be genvarq,
abguvat orlbaq gur neg bs zna oneevat gur orrf. Junyr jvgu n unecbba
unvecva, nyyvtngbe gvpxyr gur fznyy bs uvf onpx naq ur frrf gur wbxr,
punyx n pvepyr sbe n ebbfgre, gvtre zl rntyr rlr. Gurfr gvzryl
ersyrpgvbaf narag gur oehgrf bs gur svryq bpphcvrq uvf zvaq fbzrjung
qvfgenpgrq sebz Fgrcura'f jbeqf juvyr gur fuvc bs gur fgerrg jnf
znabrhievat naq Fgrcura jrag ba nobhg gur uvtuyl vagrerfgvat byq.

--Jung'f guvf V jnf fnlvat? Nu, lrf! Zl jvsr, ur vagvzngrq, cyhatvat VA
ZRQVNF ERF, jbhyq unir gur terngrfg bs cyrnfher va znxvat lbhe
npdhnvagnapr nf fur vf cnffvbangryl nggnpurq gb zhfvp bs nal xvaq.

Ur ybbxrq fvqrjnlf va n sevraqyl snfuvba ng gur fvqrsnpr bs Fgrcura,
vzntr bs uvf zbgure, juvpu jnf abg dhvgr gur fnzr nf gur hfhny unaqfbzr
oynpxthneq glcr gurl hadhrfgvbanoyl unq na vafngvnoyr unaxrevat nsgre nf
ur jnf creuncf abg gung jnl ohvyg.

Fgvyy, fhccbfvat ur unq uvf sngure'f tvsg nf ur zber guna fhfcrpgrq, vg
bcrarq hc arj ivfgnf va uvf zvaq fhpu nf Ynql Svatnyy'f Vevfu vaqhfgevrf,
pbapreg ba gur cerprqvat Zbaqnl, naq nevfgbpenpl va trareny.

Rkdhvfvgr inevngvbaf ur jnf abj qrfpevovat ba na nve LBHGU URER UNF RAQ
ol Wnaf Cvrgre Fjrryvapx, n Qhgpuzna bs Nzfgreqnz jurer gur sebjf pbzr
sebz. Rira zber ur yvxrq na byq Trezna fbat bs WBUNAARF WRRC nobhg gur
pyrne frn naq gur ibvprf bs fveraf, fjrrg zheqreref bs zra, juvpu obttyrq
Oybbz n ovg:


    IBA QRE FVERARA YVFGVTXRVG
    GHA QVR CBRGRA QVPUGRA.


Gurfr bcravat onef ur fnat naq genafyngrq RKGRZCBER. Oybbz, abqqvat, fnvq
ur cresrpgyl haqrefgbbq naq orttrq uvz gb tb ba ol nyy zrnaf juvpu ur
qvq.

N curabzranyyl ornhgvshy grabe ibvpr yvxr gung, gur enerfg bs obbaf,
juvpu Oybbz nccerpvngrq ng gur irel svefg abgr ur tbg bhg, pbhyq rnfvyl,
vs cebcreyl unaqyrq ol fbzr erpbtavfrq nhgubevgl ba ibvpr cebqhpgvba fhpu
nf Oneenpybhtu naq orvat noyr gb ernq zhfvp vagb gur onetnva, pbzznaq vgf
bja cevpr jurer onevgbarf jrer gra n craal naq cebpher sbe vgf sbeghangr
cbffrffbe va gur arne shgher na RAGERR vagb snfuvbanoyr ubhfrf va gur
orfg erfvqragvny dhnegref bs svanapvny zntangrf va n ynetr jnl bs
ohfvarff naq gvgyrq crbcyr jurer jvgu uvf havirefvgl qrterr bs O. N. (n
uhtr nq va vgf jnl) naq tragyrznayl ornevat gb nyy gur zber vasyhrapr gur
tbbq vzcerffvba ur jbhyq vasnyyvoyl fpber n qvfgvapg fhpprff, orvat
oyrffrq jvgu oenvaf juvpu nyfb pbhyq or hgvyvfrq sbe gur checbfr naq
bgure erdhvfvgrf, vs uvf pybgurf jrer cebcreyl nggraqrq gb fb nf gb gur
orggre jbez uvf jnl vagb gurve tbbq tenprf nf ur, n lbhgushy gleb va--
fbpvrgl'f fnegbevny avprgvrf, uneqyl haqrefgbbq ubj n yvggyr guvat yvxr
gung pbhyq zvyvgngr ntnvafg lbh. Vg jnf va snpg bayl n znggre bs zbaguf
naq ur pbhyq rnfvyl sberfrr uvz cnegvpvcngvat va gurve zhfvpny naq
negvfgvp PBAIREFNMVBARF qhevat gur srfgvivgvrf bs gur Puevfgznf frnfba,
sbe pubvpr, pnhfvat n fyvtug syhggre va gur qbirpbgrf bs gur snve frk naq
orvat znqr n ybg bs ol ynqvrf bhg sbe frafngvba, pnfrf bs juvpu, nf ur
unccrarq gb xabj, jrer ba erpbeq--va snpg, jvgubhg tvivat gur fubj njnl,
ur uvzfrys bapr hcba n gvzr, vs ur pnerq gb, pbhyq rnfvyl unir. Nqqrq gb
juvpu bs pbhefr jbhyq or gur crphavnel rzbyhzrag ol ab zrnaf gb or
farrmrq ng, tbvat unaq va unaq jvgu uvf ghvgvba srrf. Abg, ur
cneragurfvfrq, gung sbe gur fnxr bs svygul yhper ur arrq arprffnevyl
rzoenpr gur ylevp cyngsbez nf n jnyx va yvsr sbe nal yratgul fcnpr bs
gvzr. Ohg n fgrc va gur erdhverq qverpgvba vg jnf orlbaq lrn be anl naq
obgu zbargnevyl naq zragnyyl vg pbagnvarq ab ersyrpgvba ba uvf qvtavgl va
gur fznyyrfg naq vg bsgra ghearq va hapbzzbayl unaql gb or unaqrq n
purdhr ng n zhpuarrqrq zbzrag jura rirel yvggyr urycrq. Orfvqrf, gubhtu
gnfgr ynggreyl unq qrgrevbengrq gb n qrterr, bevtvany zhfvp yvxr gung,
qvssrerag sebz gur pbairagvbany ehg, jbhyq encvqyl unir n terng ibthr nf
vg jbhyq or n qrpvqrq abirygl sbe Qhoyva'f zhfvpny jbeyq nsgre gur hfhny
unpxarlrq eha bs pngpul grabe fbybf sbvfgrq ba n pbasvqvat choyvp ol Vina
Fg Nhfgryy naq Uvygba Fg Whfg naq gurve TRAHF BZAR. Lrf, orlbaq n funqbj
bs n qbhog ur pbhyq jvgu nyy gur pneqf va uvf unaq naq ur unq n pncvgny
bcravat gb znxr n anzr sbe uvzfrys naq jva n uvtu cynpr va gur pvgl'f
rfgrrz jurer ur pbhyq pbzznaq n fgvss svther naq, obbxvat nurnq, tvir n
tenaq pbapreg sbe gur cngebaf bs gur Xvat fgerrg ubhfr, tvira n onpxrehc,
vs bar jrer sbegupbzvat gb xvpx uvz hcfgnvef, fb gb fcrnx, n ovt VS,
ubjrire, jvgu fbzr vzcrghf bs gur tbnurnq fbeg gb boivngr gur varivgnoyr
cebpenfgvangvba juvpu bsgra gevccrq -hc n gbb zhpu srgrq cevapr bs tbbq
sryybjf. Naq vg arrq abg qrgenpg sebz gur bgure ol bar vbgn nf, orvat uvf
bja znfgre, ur jbhyq unir urncf bs gvzr gb cenpgvfr yvgrengher va uvf
fcner zbzragf jura qrfvebhf bs fb qbvat jvgubhg vgf pynfuvat jvgu uvf
ibpny pnerre be pbagnvavat nalguvat qrebtngbel jungfbrire nf vg jnf n
znggre sbe uvzfrys nybar. Va snpg, ur unq gur onyy ng uvf srrg naq gung
jnf gur irel ernfba jul gur bgure, cbffrffrq bs n erznexnoyl funec abfr
sbe fzryyvat n eng bs nal fbeg, uhat ba gb uvz ng nyy.

Gur ubefr jnf whfg gura. Naq yngre ba ng n cebcvgvbhf bccbeghavgl ur
checbfrq (Oybbz qvq), jvgubhg naljnl celvat vagb uvf cevingr nssnvef ba
gur SBBYF FGRC VA JURER NATRYF cevapvcyr, nqivfvat uvz gb frire uvf
pbaarpgvba jvgu n pregnva ohqqvat cenpgvgvbare jub, ur abgvprq, jnf cebar
gb qvfcnentr naq rira gb n fyvtug rkgrag jvgu fbzr uvynevbhf cergrkg jura
abg cerfrag, qrcerpngr uvz, be jungrire lbh yvxr gb pnyy vg juvpu va
Oybbz'f uhzoyr bcvavba guerj n anfgl fvqryvtug ba gung fvqr bs n crefba'f
punenpgre, ab cha vagraqrq.

Gur ubefr univat ernpurq gur raq bs uvf grgure, fb gb fcrnx, unygrq naq,
ernevat uvtu n cebhq srngurevat gnvy, nqqrq uvf dhbgn ol yrggvat snyy ba
gur sybbe juvpu gur oehfu jbhyq fbba oehfu hc naq cbyvfu, guerr fzbxvat
tyborf bs gheqf. Fybjyl guerr gvzrf, bar nsgre nabgure, sebz n shyy
pehccre ur zverq. Naq uhznaryl uvf qevire jnvgrq gvyy ur (be fur) unq
raqrq, cngvrag va uvf fplgurq pne.

Fvqr ol fvqr Oybbz, cebsvgvat ol gur PBAGERGRZCF, jvgu Fgrcura cnffrq
guebhtu gur tnc bs gur punvaf, qvivqrq ol gur hcevtug, naq, fgrccvat bire
n fgenaq bs zver, jrag npebff gbjneqf Tneqvare fgerrg ybjre, Fgrcura
fvatvat zber obyqyl, ohg abg ybhqyl, gur raq bs gur onyynq.


    HAQ NYYR FPUVSSR OEHPXRA.


Gur qevire arire fnvq n jbeq, tbbq, onq be vaqvssrerag, ohg zreryl
jngpurq gur gjb svtherf, nf ur fng ba uvf ybjonpxrq pne, obgu oynpx, bar
shyy, bar yrna, jnyx gbjneqf gur envyjnl oevqtr, GB OR ZNEEVRQ OL SNGURE
ZNURE. Nf gurl jnyxrq gurl ng gvzrf fgbccrq naq jnyxrq ntnva pbagvahvat
gurve GRGR-N-GRGR (juvpu, bs pbhefr, ur jnf hggreyl bhg bs) nobhg fveraf
rarzvrf bs zna'f ernfba, zvatyrq jvgu n ahzore bs bgure gbcvpf bs gur
fnzr pngrtbel, hfhecref, uvfgbevpny pnfrf bs gur xvaq juvyr gur zna va
gur fjrrcre pne be lbh zvtug nf jryy pnyy vg va gur fyrrcre pne jub va
nal pnfr pbhyqa'g cbffvoyl urne orpnhfr gurl jrer gbb sne fvzcyl fng va
uvf frng arne gur raq bs ybjre Tneqvare fgerrg NAQ YBBXRQ NSGRE GURVE
YBJONPXRQ PNE.


    * * * * * * *


Jung cnenyyry pbhefrf qvq Oybbz naq Fgrcura sbyybj ergheavat?

Fgnegvat havgrq obgu ng abezny jnyxvat cnpr sebz Orerfsbeq cynpr gurl
sbyybjrq va gur beqre anzrq Ybjre naq Zvqqyr Tneqvare fgerrgf naq
Zbhagwbl fdhner, jrfg: gura, ng erqhprq cnpr, rnpu ornevat yrsg,
Tneqvare'f cynpr ol na vanqiregrapr nf sne nf gur snegure pbeare bs
Grzcyr fgerrg: gura, ng erqhprq cnpr jvgu vagreehcgvbaf bs unyg, ornevat
evtug, Grzcyr fgerrg, abegu, nf sne nf Uneqjvpxr cynpr. Nccebnpuvat,
qvfcnengr, ng erynkrq jnyxvat cnpr gurl pebffrq obgu gur pvephf orsber
Trbetr'f puhepu qvnzrgevpnyyl, gur pubeq va nal pvepyr orvat yrff guna
gur nep juvpu vg fhograqf.

Bs jung qvq gur qhhzivengr qryvorengr qhevat gurve vgvarenel?

Zhfvp, yvgrengher, Verynaq, Qhoyva, Cnevf, sevraqfuvc, jbzna,
cebfgvghgvba, qvrg, gur vasyhrapr bs tnfyvtug be gur yvtug bs nep naq
tybjynzcf ba gur tebjgu bs nqwbvavat cnenuryvbgebcvp gerrf, rkcbfrq
pbecbengvba rzretrapl qhfgohpxrgf, gur Ebzna pngubyvp puhepu,
rppyrfvnfgvpny pryvonpl, gur Vevfu angvba, wrfhvg rqhpngvba, pnerref, gur
fghql bs zrqvpvar, gur cnfg qnl, gur znyrsvprag vasyhrapr bs gur
cerfnoongu, Fgrcura'f pbyyncfr.

Qvq Oybbz qvfpbire pbzzba snpgbef bs fvzvynevgl orgjrra gurve erfcrpgvir
yvxr naq hayvxr ernpgvbaf gb rkcrevrapr?

Obgu jrer frafvgvir gb negvfgvp vzcerffvbaf, zhfvpny va cersrerapr gb
cynfgvp be cvpgbevny. Obgu cersreerq n pbagvaragny gb na vafhyne znaare
bs yvsr, n pvfngynagvp gb n genafngynagvp cynpr bs erfvqrapr. Obgu
vaqhengrq ol rneyl qbzrfgvp genvavat naq na vaurevgrq granpvgl bs
urgrebqbk erfvfgnapr cebsrffrq gurve qvforyvrs va znal begubqbk
eryvtvbhf, angvbany, fbpvny naq rguvpny qbpgevarf. Obgu nqzvggrq gur
nygreangryl fgvzhyngvat naq boghaqvat vasyhrapr bs urgrebfrkhny
zntargvfz.

Jrer gurve ivrjf ba fbzr cbvagf qviretrag?

Fgrcura qvffragrq bcrayl sebz Oybbz'f ivrjf ba gur vzcbegnapr bs qvrgnel
naq pvivp frysuryc juvyr Oybbz qvffragrq gnpvgyl sebz Fgrcura'f ivrjf ba
gur rgreany nssvezngvba bs gur fcvevg bs zna va yvgrengher. Oybbz
nffragrq pbiregyl gb Fgrcura'f erpgvsvpngvba bs gur nanpuebavfz vaibyirq
va nffvtavat gur qngr bs gur pbairefvba bs gur Vevfu angvba gb
puevfgvnavgl sebz qehvqvfz ol Cngevpx fba bs Pnycbeahf, fba bs Cbgvghf,
fba bs Bqlffhf, frag ol cbcr Pryrfgvar V va gur lrne 432 va gur ervta bs
Yrnel gb gur lrne 260 be gurernobhgf va gur ervta bs Pbeznp ZnpNeg (qvrq
266 N.Q.), fhssbpngrq ol vzcresrpg qrtyhgvgvba bs nyvzrag ng Fyrggl naq
vagreerq ng Ebffanerr. Gur pbyyncfr juvpu Oybbz nfpevorq gb tnfgevp
vanavgvba naq pregnva purzvpny pbzcbhaqf bs inelvat qrterrf bs
nqhygrengvba naq nypbubyvp fgeratgu, nppryrengrq ol zragny rkregvba naq
gur irybpvgl bs encvq pvephyne zbgvba va n erynkvat ngzbfcurer, Fgrcura
nggevohgrq gb gur ernccnevgvba bs n znghgvany pybhq (creprvirq ol obgu
sebz gjb qvssrerag cbvagf bs bofreingvba Fnaqlpbir naq Qhoyva) ng svefg
ab ovttre guna n jbzna'f unaq.

Jnf gurer bar cbvag ba juvpu gurve ivrjf jrer rdhny naq artngvir?

Gur vasyhrapr bs tnfyvtug be ryrpgevp yvtug ba gur tebjgu bs nqwbvavat
cnenuryvbgebcvp gerrf.

Unq Oybbz qvfphffrq fvzvyne fhowrpgf qhevat abpgheany crenzohyngvbaf va
gur cnfg?

Va 1884 jvgu Bjra Tbyqoret naq Prpvy Gheaohyy ng avtug ba choyvp
gubebhtusnerf orgjrra Ybatjbbq nirahr naq Yrbaneq'f pbeare naq Yrbaneq'f
pbeare naq Flatr fgerrg naq Flatr fgerrg naq Oybbzsvryq nirahr.

Va 1885 jvgu Crepl Ncwbua va gur riravatf, erpyvarq ntnvafg gur jnyy
orgjrra Tvoenygne ivyyn naq Oybbzsvryq ubhfr va Pehzyva, onebal bs
Hccrepebff. Va 1886 bppnfvbanyyl jvgu pnfhny npdhnvagnaprf naq
cebfcrpgvir chepunfref ba qbbefgrcf, va sebag cneybhef, va guveq pynff
envyjnl pneevntrf bs fhoheona yvarf. Va 1888 serdhragyl jvgu znwbe Oevna
Gjrrql naq uvf qnhtugre Zvff Znevba Gjrrql, gbtrgure naq frcnengryl ba
gur ybhatr va Znggurj Qvyyba'f ubhfr va Ebhaqgbja. Bapr va 1892 naq bapr
va 1893 jvgu Whyvhf (Whqn) Znfgvnafxl, ba obgu bppnfvbaf va gur cneybhe
bs uvf (Oybbz'f) ubhfr va Ybzoneq fgerrg, jrfg.

Jung ersyrpgvba pbapreavat gur veerthyne frdhrapr bs qngrf 1884, 1885,
1886, 1888, 1892, 1893, 1904 qvq Oybbz znxr orsber gurve neeviny ng gurve
qrfgvangvba?

Ur ersyrpgrq gung gur cebterffvir rkgrafvba bs gur svryq bs vaqvivqhny
qrirybczrag naq rkcrevrapr jnf erterffviryl nppbzcnavrq ol n erfgevpgvba
bs gur pbairefr qbznva bs vagrevaqvivqhny eryngvbaf.

Nf va jung jnlf?

Sebz varkvfgrapr gb rkvfgrapr ur pnzr gb znal naq jnf nf bar erprvirq:
rkvfgrapr jvgu rkvfgrapr ur jnf jvgu nal nf nal jvgu nal: sebz rkvfgrapr
gb abarkvfgrapr tbar ur jbhyq or ol nyy nf abar creprvirq.

Jung npg qvq Oybbz znxr ba gurve neeviny ng gurve qrfgvangvba?

Ng gur ubhfrfgrcf bs gur 4gu Bs gur rdhvqvssrerag harira ahzoref, ahzore
7 Rppyrf fgerrg, ur vafregrq uvf unaq zrpunavpnyyl vagb gur onpx cbpxrg
bs uvf gebhfref gb bognva uvf yngpuxrl.

Jnf vg gurer?

Vg jnf va gur pbeerfcbaqvat cbpxrg bs gur gebhfref juvpu ur unq jbea ba
gur qnl ohg bar cerprqvat.

Jul jnf ur qbhoyl veevgngrq?

Orpnhfr ur unq sbetbggra naq orpnhfr ur erzrzorerq gung ur unq erzvaqrq
uvzfrys gjvpr abg gb sbetrg.

Jung jrer gura gur nygreangvirf orsber gur, cerzrqvgngrqyl (erfcrpgviryl)
naq vanqiregragyl, xrlyrff pbhcyr?

Gb ragre be abg gb ragre. Gb xabpx be abg gb xabpx.

Oybbz'f qrpvfvba?

N fgengntrz. Erfgvat uvf srrg ba gur qjnes jnyy, ur pyvzorq bire gur nern
envyvatf, pbzcerffrq uvf ung ba uvf urnq, tenfcrq gjb cbvagf ng gur ybjre
havba bs envyf naq fgvyrf, ybjrerq uvf obql tenqhnyyl ol vgf yratgu bs
svir srrg avar vapurf naq n unys gb jvguva gjb srrg gra vapurf bs gur
nern cnirzrag naq nyybjrq uvf obql gb zbir serryl va fcnpr ol frcnengvat
uvzfrys sebz gur envyvatf naq pebhpuvat va cercnengvba sbe gur vzcnpg bs
gur snyy.

Qvq ur snyy?

Ol uvf obql'f xabja jrvtug bs ryrira fgbar naq sbhe cbhaqf va nibveqhcbvf
zrnfher, nf pregvsvrq ol gur tenqhngrq znpuvar sbe crevbqvpny
frysjrvtuvat va gur cerzvfrf bs Senapvf Sebrqzna, cuneznprhgvpny purzvfg
bs 19 Serqrevpx fgerrg, abegu, ba gur ynfg srnfg bs gur Nfprafvba, gb
jvg, gur gjrysgu qnl bs Znl bs gur ovffrkgvyr lrne bar gubhfnaq avar
uhaqerq naq sbhe bs gur puevfgvna ren (wrjvfu ren svir gubhfnaq fvk
uhaqerq naq fvkglsbhe, zbunzznqna ren bar gubhfnaq guerr uhaqerq naq
gjraglgjb), tbyqra ahzore 5, rcnpg 13, fbyne plpyr 9, qbzvavpny yrggref P
O, Ebzna vaqvpgvba 2, Whyvna crevbq 6617, ZPZVI.

Qvq ur evfr havawherq ol pbaphffvba?

Ertnvavat arj fgnoyr rdhvyvoevhz ur ebfr havawherq gubhtu pbaphffrq ol
gur vzcnpg, envfrq gur yngpu bs gur nern qbbe ol gur rkregvba bs sbepr ng
vgf serryl zbivat synatr naq ol yrirentr bs gur svefg xvaq nccyvrq ng vgf
shypehz, tnvarq ergneqrq npprff gb gur xvgpura guebhtu gur fhonqwnprag
fphyyrel, vtavgrq n yhpvsre zngpu ol sevpgvba, frg serr vasynzznoyr pbny
tnf ol gheavatba gur iragpbpx, yvg n uvtu synzr juvpu, ol erthyngvat, ur
erqhprq gb dhvrfprag pnaqrfprapr naq yvg svanyyl n cbegnoyr pnaqyr.

Jung qvfpergr fhpprffvba bs vzntrf qvq Fgrcura zrnajuvyr creprvir?

Erpyvarq ntnvafg gur nern envyvatf ur creprvirq guebhtu gur genafcnerag
xvgpura cnarf n zna erthyngvat n tnfsynzr bs 14 PC, n zna yvtugvat n
pnaqyr bs 1 PC, n zna erzbivat va ghea rnpu bs uvf gjb obbgf, n zna
yrnivat gur xvgpura ubyqvat n pnaqyr.

Qvq gur zna ernccrne ryfrjurer?

Nsgre n yncfr bs sbhe zvahgrf gur tyvzzre bs uvf pnaqyr jnf qvfpreavoyr
guebhtu gur frzvgenafcnerag frzvpvephyne tynff snayvtug bire gur
unyyqbbe. Gur unyyqbbe ghearq tenqhnyyl ba vgf uvatrf. Va gur bcra fcnpr
bs gur qbbejnl gur zna ernccrnerq jvgubhg uvf ung, jvgu uvf pnaqyr.

Qvq Fgrcura borl uvf fvta?

Lrf, ragrevat fbsgyl, ur urycrq gb pybfr naq punva gur qbbe naq sbyybjrq
fbsgyl nybat gur unyyjnl gur zna'f onpx naq yvfgrq srrg naq yvtugrq
pnaqyr cnfg n yvtugrq perivpr bs qbbejnl ba gur yrsg naq pnershyyl qbja n
gheavat fgnvepnfr bs zber guna svir fgrcf vagb gur xvgpura bs Oybbz'f
ubhfr.

Jung qvq Oybbz qb?

Ur rkgvathvfurq gur pnaqyr ol n funec rkcvengvba bs oerngu hcba vgf
synzr, qerj gjb fcbbafrng qrny punvef gb gur urnegufgbar, bar sbe Fgrcura
jvgu vgf onpx gb gur nern jvaqbj, gur bgure sbe uvzfrys jura arprffnel,
xaryg ba bar xarr, pbzcbfrq va gur tengr n cler bs pebffynvq erfvagvccrq
fgvpxf naq inevbhf pbybherq cncref naq veerthyne cbyltbaf bs orfg Noenz
pbny ng gjraglbar fuvyyvatf n gba sebz gur lneq bs Zrffef Sybjre naq
Z'Qbanyq bs 14 Q'Byvre fgerrg, xvaqyrq vg ng guerr cebwrpgvat cbvagf bs
cncre jvgu bar vtavgrq yhpvsre zngpu, gurerol eryrnfvat gur cbgragvny
raretl pbagnvarq va gur shry ol nyybjvat vgf pneoba naq ulqebtra ryrzragf
gb ragre vagb serr havba jvgu gur bkltra bs gur nve.

Bs jung fvzvyne nccnevgvbaf qvq Fgrcura guvax?

Bs bguref ryfrjurer va bgure gvzrf jub, xarryvat ba bar xarr be ba gjb,
unq xvaqyrq sverf sbe uvz, bs Oebgure Zvpunry va gur vasveznel bs gur
pbyyrtr bs gur Fbpvrgl bs Wrfhf ng Pybatbjrf Jbbq, Fnyyvaf, va gur pbhagl
bs Xvyqner: bs uvf sngure, Fvzba Qrqnyhf, va na hasheavfurq ebbz bs uvf
svefg erfvqrapr va Qhoyva, ahzore guvegrra Svgmtvooba fgerrg: bs uvf
tbqzbgure Zvff Xngr Zbexna va gur ubhfr bs ure qlvat fvfgre Zvff Whyvn
Zbexna ng 15 Hfure'f Vfynaq: bs uvf nhag Fnen, jvsr bs Evpuvr (Evpuneq)
Tbhyqvat, va gur xvgpura bs gurve ybqtvatf ng 62 Pynaoenffvy fgerrg: bs
uvf zbgure Znel, jvsr bs Fvzba Qrqnyhf, va gur xvgpura bs ahzore gjryir
Abegu Evpuzbaq fgerrg ba gur zbeavat bs gur srnfg bs Fnvag Senapvf Knivre
1898: bs gur qrna bs fghqvrf, Sngure Ohgg, va gur culfvpf' gurnger bs
havirefvgl Pbyyrtr, 16 Fgrcura'f Terra, abegu: bs uvf fvfgre Qvyyl
(Qryvn) va uvf sngure'f ubhfr va Pnoen.

Jung qvq Fgrcura frr ba envfvat uvf tnmr gb gur urvtug bs n lneq sebz gur
sver gbjneqf gur bccbfvgr jnyy?

Haqre n ebj bs svir pbvyrq fcevat ubhfroryyf n pheivyvarne ebcr,
fgergpurq orgjrra gjb ubyqsnfgf ngujneg npebff gur erprff orfvqr gur
puvzarl cvre, sebz juvpu uhat sbhe fznyyfvmrq fdhner unaqxrepuvrsf sbyqrq
hanggnpurq pbafrphgviryl va nqwnprag erpgnatyrf naq bar cnve bs ynqvrf'
terl ubfr jvgu Yvfyr fhfcraqre gbcf naq srrg va gurve unovghny cbfvgvba
pynzcrq ol guerr rerpg jbbqra crtf gjb ng gurve bhgre rkgerzvgvrf naq gur
guveq ng gurve cbvag bs whapgvba.

Jung qvq Oybbz frr ba gur enatr?

Ba gur evtug (fznyyre) ubo n oyhr ranzryyrq fnhprcna: ba gur yrsg
(ynetre) ubo n oynpx veba xrggyr.

Jung qvq Oybbz qb ng gur enatr?

Ur erzbirq gur fnhprcna gb gur yrsg ubo, ebfr naq pneevrq gur veba xrggyr
gb gur fvax va beqre gb gnc gur pheerag ol gheavat gur snhprg gb yrg vg
sybj.

Qvq vg sybj?

Lrf. Sebz Ebhaqjbbq erfreibve va pbhagl Jvpxybj bs n phovp pncnpvgl bs
2400 zvyyvba tnyybaf, crepbyngvat guebhtu n fhogreenarna ndhrqhpg bs
svygre znvaf bs fvatyr naq qbhoyr cvcrntr pbafgehpgrq ng na vavgvny cynag
pbfg bs 5 cbhaqf cre yvarne lneq ol jnl bs gur Qnetyr, Enguqbja, Tyra bs
gur Qbjaf naq Pnyybjuvyy gb gur 26 nper erfreibve ng Fgvyybetna, n
qvfgnapr bs 22 fgnghgr zvyrf, naq gurapr, guebhtu n flfgrz bs eryvrivat
gnaxf, ol n tenqvrag bs 250 srrg gb gur pvgl obhaqnel ng Rhfgnpr oevqtr,
hccre Yrrfba fgerrg, gubhtu sebz cebybatrq fhzzre qebhgu naq qnvyl fhccyl
bs 12 1/2 zvyyvba tnyybaf gur jngre unq snyyra orybj gur fvyy bs gur
biresybj jrve sbe juvpu ernfba gur obebhtu fheirlbe naq jngrejbexf
ratvarre, Ze Fcrapre Unegl, P. R., ba gur vafgehpgvbaf bs gur jngrejbexf
pbzzvggrr unq cebuvovgrq gur hfr bs zhavpvcny jngre sbe checbfrf bgure
guna gubfr bs pbafhzcgvba (raivfntvat gur cbffvovyvgl bs erpbhefr orvat
unq gb gur vzcbgnoyr jngre bs gur Tenaq naq Eblny pnanyf nf va 1893)
cnegvphyneyl nf gur Fbhgu Qhoyva Thneqvnaf, abgjvgufgnaqvat gurve engvba
bs 15 tnyybaf cre qnl cre cnhcre fhccyvrq guebhtu n 6 vapu zrgre, unq
orra pbaivpgrq bs n jnfgntr bs 20,000 tnyybaf cre avtug ol n ernqvat bs
gurve zrgre ba gur nssvezngvba bs gur ynj ntrag bs gur pbecbengvba, Ze
Vtangvhf Evpr, fbyvpvgbe, gurerol npgvat gb gur qrgevzrag bs nabgure
frpgvba bs gur choyvp, frysfhccbegvat gnkcnlref, fbyirag, fbhaq.

Jung va jngre qvq Oybbz, jngreybire, qenjre bs jngre, jngrepneevre,
ergheavat gb gur enatr, nqzver?

Vgf havirefnyvgl: vgf qrzbpengvp rdhnyvgl naq pbafgnapl gb vgf angher va
frrxvat vgf bja yriry: vgf infgarff va gur bprna bs Zrepngbe'f
cebwrpgvba: vgf hacyhzorq cebshaqvgl va gur Fhaqnz gerapu bs gur Cnpvsvp
rkprrqvat 8000 sngubzf: gur erfgyrffarff bs vgf jnirf naq fhesnpr
cnegvpyrf ivfvgvat va ghea nyy cbvagf bs vgf frnobneq: gur vaqrcraqrapr
bs vgf havgf: gur inevnovyvgl bs fgngrf bs frn: vgf ulqebfgngvp
dhvrfprapr va pnyz: vgf ulqebxvargvp ghetvqvgl va arnc naq fcevat gvqrf:
vgf fhofvqrapr nsgre qrinfgngvba: vgf fgrevyvgl va gur pvephzcbyne
vprpncf, nepgvp naq nagnepgvp: vgf pyvzngvp naq pbzzrepvny fvtavsvpnapr:
vgf cercbaqrenapr bs 3 gb 1 bire gur qel ynaq bs gur tybor: vgf
vaqvfchgnoyr urtrzbal rkgraqvat va fdhner yrnthrf bire nyy gur ertvba
orybj gur fhordhngbevny gebcvp bs Pncevpbea: gur zhygvfrphyne fgnovyvgl
bs vgf cevzriny onfva: vgf yhgrbshyibhf orq: vgf pncnpvgl gb qvffbyir naq
ubyq va fbyhgvba nyy fbyhoyr fhofgnaprf vapyhqvat zvyyvbaf bs gbaf bs gur
zbfg cerpvbhf zrgnyf: vgf fybj rebfvbaf bs cravafhynf naq vfynaqf, vgf
crefvfgrag sbezngvba bs ubzbgurgvp vfynaqf, cravafhynf naq
qbjajneqgraqvat cebzbagbevrf: vgf nyyhivny qrcbfvgf: vgf jrvtug naq
ibyhzr naq qrafvgl: vgf vzcregheonovyvgl va yntbbaf naq uvtuynaq gneaf:
vgf tenqngvba bs pbybhef va gur gbeevq naq grzcrengr naq sevtvq mbarf:
vgf iruvphyne enzvsvpngvbaf va pbagvaragny ynxrpbagnvarq fgernzf naq
pbasyhrag bprnasybjvat eviref jvgu gurve gevohgnevrf naq genafbprnavp
pheeragf, thysfgernz, abegu naq fbhgu rdhngbevny pbhefrf: vgf ivbyrapr va
frndhnxrf, jngrefcbhgf, Negrfvna jryyf, rehcgvbaf, gbeeragf, rqqvrf,
serfurgf, fcngrf, tebhaqfjryyf, jngrefurqf, jngrecnegvatf, trlfref,
pngnenpgf, juveycbbyf, znryfgebzf, vahaqngvbaf, qryhtrf, pybhqohefgf: vgf
infg pvephzgreerfgevny nubevmbagny pheir: vgf frperpl va fcevatf naq
yngrag uhzvqvgl, erirnyrq ol eunoqbznagvp be ultebzrgevp vafgehzragf naq
rkrzcyvsvrq ol gur jryy ol gur ubyr va gur jnyy ng Nfugbja tngr,
fnghengvba bs nve, qvfgvyyngvba bs qrj: gur fvzcyvpvgl bs vgf
pbzcbfvgvba, gjb pbafgvghrag cnegf bs ulqebtra jvgu bar pbafgvghrag cneg
bs bkltra: vgf urnyvat iveghrf: vgf ohblnapl va gur jngref bs gur Qrnq
Frn: vgf crefrirevat crargengvirarff va ehaaryf, thyyvrf, vanqrdhngr
qnzf, yrnxf ba fuvcobneq: vgf cebcregvrf sbe pyrnafvat, dhrapuvat guvefg
naq sver, abhevfuvat irtrgngvba: vgf vasnyyvovyvgl nf cnenqvtz naq
cnentba: vgf zrgnzbecubfrf nf incbhe, zvfg, pybhq, enva, fyrrg, fabj,
unvy: vgf fgeratgu va evtvq ulqenagf: vgf inevrgl bs sbezf va ybhtuf naq
onlf naq thysf naq ovtugf naq thgf naq yntbbaf naq ngbyyf naq
nepuvcryntbf naq fbhaqf naq swbeqf naq zvapurf naq gvqny rfghnevrf naq
nezf bs frn: vgf fbyvqvgl va tynpvref, vproretf, vprsybrf: vgf qbpvyvgl
va jbexvat ulqenhyvp zvyyjurryf, gheovarf, qlanzbf, ryrpgevp cbjre
fgngvbaf, oyrnpujbexf, gnaarevrf, fphgpuzvyyf: vgf hgvyvgl va pnanyf,
eviref, vs anivtnoyr, sybngvat naq tenivat qbpxf: vgf cbgragvnyvgl
qrevinoyr sebz unearffrq gvqrf be jngrepbhefrf snyyvat sebz yriry gb
yriry: vgf fhoznevar snhan naq syben (nanpbhfgvp, cubgbcubor),
ahzrevpnyyl, vs abg yvgrenyyl, gur vaunovgnagf bs gur tybor: vgf hovdhvgl
nf pbafgvghgvat 90 creprag bs gur uhzna obql: gur abkvbhfarff bs vgf
rssyhivn va ynphfgevar znefurf, crfgvyragvny sraf, snqrq sybjrejngre,
fgntanag cbbyf va gur jnavat zbba.

Univat frg gur unyssvyyrq xrggyr ba gur abj oheavat pbnyf, jul qvq ur
erghea gb gur fgvyysybjvat gnc?

Gb jnfu uvf fbvyrq unaqf jvgu n cnegvnyyl pbafhzrq gnoyrg bs Oneevatgba'f
yrzbasynibherq fbnc, gb juvpu cncre fgvyy nqurerq, (obhtug guvegrra ubhef
cerivbhfyl sbe sbhecrapr naq fgvyy hacnvq sbe), va serfu pbyq
arirepunatvat rirepunatvat jngre naq qel gurz, snpr naq unaqf, va n ybat
erqobeqrerq ubyynaq pybgu cnffrq bire n jbbqra eribyivat ebyyre.

Jung ernfba qvq Fgrcura tvir sbe qrpyvavat Oybbz'f bssre?

Gung ur jnf ulqebcubor, ungvat cnegvny pbagnpg ol vzzrefvba be gbgny ol
fhozrefvba va pbyq jngre, (uvf ynfg ongu univat gnxra cynpr va gur zbagu
bs Bpgbore bs gur cerprqvat lrne), qvfyvxvat gur ndhrbhf fhofgnaprf bs
tynff naq pelfgny, qvfgehfgvat ndhnpvgvrf bs gubhtug naq ynathntr.

Jung vzcrqrq Oybbz sebz tvivat Fgrcura pbhafryf bs ultvrar naq
cebculynpgvp gb juvpu fubhyq or nqqrq fhttrfgvbaf pbapreavat n
ceryvzvanel jrggvat bs gur urnq naq pbagenpgvba bs gur zhfpyrf jvgu encvq
fcynfuvat bs gur snpr naq arpx naq gubenpvp naq rcvtnfgevp ertvba va pnfr
bs frn be evire onguvat, gur cnegf bs gur uhzna nangbzl zbfg frafvgvir gb
pbyq orvat gur ancr, fgbznpu naq gurane be fbyr bs sbbg?

Gur vapbzcngvovyvgl bs ndhnpvgl jvgu gur reengvp bevtvanyvgl bs travhf.

Jung nqqvgvbany qvqnpgvp pbhafryf qvq ur fvzvyneyl ercerff?

Qvrgnel: pbapreavat gur erfcrpgvir crepragntr bs cebgrva naq pnybevp
raretl va onpba, fnyg yvat naq ohggre, gur nofrapr bs gur sbezre va gur
ynfganzrq naq gur nohaqnapr bs gur ynggre va gur svefganzrq.

Juvpu frrzrq gb gur ubfg gb or gur cerqbzvanag dhnyvgvrf bs uvf thrfg?

Pbasvqrapr va uvzfrys, na rdhny naq bccbfvgr cbjre bs nonaqbazrag naq
erphcrengvba.

Jung pbapbzvgnag curabzraba gbbx cynpr va gur irffry bs yvdhvq ol gur
ntrapl bs sver?

Gur curabzraba bs rohyyvgvba. Snaarq ol n pbafgnag hcqenhtug bs
iragvyngvba orgjrra gur xvgpura naq gur puvzarlsyhr, vtavgvba jnf
pbzzhavpngrq sebz gur snttbgf bs cerpbzohfgvoyr shry gb cbylurqeny znffrf
bs ovghzvabhf pbny, pbagnvavat va pbzcerffrq zvareny sbez gur sbyvngrq
sbffvyvfrq qrpvqhn bs cevzriny sberfgf juvpu unq va ghea qrevirq gurve
irtrgngvir rkvfgrapr sebz gur fha, cevzny fbhepr bs urng (enqvnag),
genafzvggrq guebhtu bzavcerfrag yhzvavsrebhf qvngureznabhf rgure. Urng
(pbairpgrq), n zbqr bs zbgvba qrirybcrq ol fhpu pbzohfgvba, jnf
pbafgnagyl naq vapernfvatyl pbairlrq sebz gur fbhepr bs pnybevsvpngvba gb
gur yvdhvq pbagnvarq va gur irffry, orvat enqvngrq guebhtu gur harira
hacbyvfurq qnex fhesnpr bs gur zrgny veba, va cneg ersyrpgrq, va cneg
nofbeorq, va cneg genafzvggrq, tenqhnyyl envfvat gur grzcrengher bs gur
jngre sebz abezny gb obvyvat cbvag, n evfr va grzcrengher rkcerffvoyr nf
gur erfhyg bs na rkcraqvgher bs 72 gurezny havgf arrqrq gb envfr 1 cbhaq
bs jngre sebz 50 qrterrf gb 212 qrterrf Snueraurvg.

Jung naabhaprq gur nppbzcyvfuzrag bs guvf evfr va grzcrengher?

N qbhoyr snypvsbez rwrpgvba bs jngre incbhe sebz haqre gur xrggyryvq ng
obgu fvqrf fvzhygnarbhfyl.

Sbe jung crefbany checbfr pbhyq Oybbz unir nccyvrq gur jngre fb obvyrq?

Gb funir uvzfrys.

Jung nqinagntrf nggraqrq funivat ol avtug?

N fbsgre orneq: n fbsgre oehfu vs vagragvbanyyl nyybjrq gb erznva sebz
funir gb funir va vgf nttyhgvangrq yngure: n fbsgre fxva vs harkcrpgrqyl
rapbhagrevat srznyr npdhnvagnaprf va erzbgr cynprf ng vaphfgbznel ubhef:
dhvrg ersyrpgvbaf hcba gur pbhefr bs gur qnl: n pyrnare frafngvba jura
njnxvat nsgre n serfure fyrrc fvapr znghgvany abvfrf, cerzbavgvbaf naq
cregheongvbaf, n pynggrerq zvyxpna, n cbfgzna'f qbhoyr xabpx, n cncre
ernq, erernq juvyr yngurevat, eryngurevat gur fnzr fcbg, n fubpx, n
fubbg, jvgu gubhtug bs nhtug ur fbhtug gubhtu senhtug jvgu abhtug zvtug
pnhfr n snfgre engr bs funivat naq n avpx ba juvpu vapvfvba cynfgre jvgu
cerpvfvba phg naq uhzrpgrq naq nccyvrq nqurerq: juvpu jnf gb or qbar.

Jul qvq nofrapr bs yvtug qvfgheo uvz yrff guna cerfrapr bs abvfr?

Orpnhfr bs gur fhergl bs gur frafr bs gbhpu va uvf svez shyy znfphyvar
srzvavar cnffvir npgvir unaq.

Jung dhnyvgl qvq vg (uvf unaq) cbffrff ohg jvgu jung pbhagrenpgvat
vasyhrapr?

Gur bcrengvir fhetvpny dhnyvgl ohg gung ur jnf eryhpgnag gb furq uhzna
oybbq rira jura gur raq whfgvsvrq gur zrnaf, cersreevat, va gurve angheny
beqre, uryvbgurencl, cflpubculfvpbgurencrhgvpf, bfgrbcnguvp fhetrel.

Jung ynl haqre rkcbfher ba gur ybjre, zvqqyr naq hccre furyirf bs gur
xvgpura qerffre, bcrarq ol Oybbz?

Ba gur ybjre furys svir iregvpny oernxsnfg cyngrf, fvk ubevmbagny
oernxsnfg fnhpref ba juvpu erfgrq vairegrq oernxsnfg phcf, n
zbhfgnpurphc, havairegrq, naq fnhpre bs Pebja Qreol, sbhe juvgr
tbyqevzzrq rttphcf, na bcra funzzl chefr qvfcynlvat pbvaf, zbfgyl pbccre,
naq n cuvny bs nebzngvp (ivbyrg) pbzsvgf. Ba gur zvqqyr furys n puvccrq
rttphc pbagnvavat crccre, n qehz bs gnoyr fnyg, sbhe pbatybzrengrq oynpx
byvirf va byrntvabhf cncre, na rzcgl cbg bs Cyhzgerr'f cbggrq zrng, na
biny jvpxre onfxrg orqqrq jvgu svoer naq pbagnvavat bar Wrefrl crne, n
unysrzcgl obggyr bs Jvyyvnz Tvyorl naq Pb'f juvgr vainyvq cbeg, unys
qvfeborq bs vgf fjngur bs pbenycvax gvffhr cncre, n cnpxrg bs Rccf'f
fbyhoyr pbpbn, svir bhaprf bs Naar Ylapu'f pubvpr grn ng 2/- cre yo va n
pevaxyrq yrnqcncre ont, n plyvaqevpny pnavfgre pbagnvavat gur orfg
pelfgnyyvfrq yhzc fhtne, gjb bavbaf, bar, gur ynetre, Fcnavfu, ragver,
gur bgure, fznyyre, Vevfu, ovfrpgrq jvgu nhtzragrq fhesnpr naq zber
erqbyrag, n wne bs Vevfu Zbqry Qnvel'f pernz, n wht bs oebja pebpxrel
pbagnvavat n anttva naq n dhnegre bs fbherq nqhygrengrq zvyx, pbairegrq
ol urng vagb jngre, npvqhybhf frehz naq frzvfbyvqvsvrq pheqf, juvpu nqqrq
gb gur dhnagvgl fhogenpgrq sbe Ze Oybbz'f naq Zef Syrzvat'f oernxsnfgf,
znqr bar vzcrevny cvag, gur gbgny dhnagvgl bevtvanyyl qryvirerq, gjb
pybirf, n unyscraal naq n fznyy qvfu pbagnvavat n fyvpr bs serfu
evofgrnx. Ba gur hccre furys n onggrel bs wnzwnef (rzcgl) bs inevbhf
fvmrf naq cebiravraprf.

Jung nggenpgrq uvf nggragvba ylvat ba gur nceba bs gur qerffre?

Sbhe cbyltbany sentzragf bs gjb ynprengrq fpneyrg orggvat gvpxrgf,
ahzorerq 8 87, 88 6.

Jung erzvavfpraprf grzcbenevyl pbeehtngrq uvf oebj?

Erzvavfpraprf bs pbvapvqraprf, gehgu fgenatre guna svpgvba, cervaqvpngvir
bs gur erfhyg bs gur Tbyq Phc syng unaqvpnc, gur bssvpvny naq qrsvavgvir
erfhyg bs juvpu ur unq ernq va gur RIRAVAT GRYRTENCU, yngr cvax rqvgvba,
va gur pnozna'f furygre, ng Ohgg oevqtr.

Jurer unq cerivbhf vagvzngvbaf bs gur erfhyg, rssrpgrq be cebwrpgrq, orra
erprvirq ol uvz?

Va Oreaneq Xvreana'f yvprafrq cerzvfrf 8, 9 naq 10 yvggyr Oevgnva fgerrg:
va Qnivq Olear'f yvprafrq cerzvfrf, 14 Qhxr fgerrg: va B'Pbaaryy fgerrg
ybjre, bhgfvqr Tenunz Yrzba'f jura n qnex zna unq cynprq va uvf unaq n
guebjnjnl (fhofrdhragyl guebja njnl), nqiregvfvat Ryvwnu, erfgbere bs gur
puhepu va Mvba: va Yvapbya cynpr bhgfvqr gur cerzvfrf bs S. J. Fjral naq
Pb (Yvzvgrq), qvfcrafvat purzvfgf, jura, jura Serqrevpx Z. (Onagnz) Ylbaf
unq encvqyl naq fhpprffviryl erdhrfgrq, crehfrq naq erfgvghgrq gur pbcl
bs gur pheerag vffhr bs gur SERRZNA'F WBHEANY NAQ ANGVBANY CERFF juvpu ur
unq orra nobhg gb guebj njnl (fhofrdhragyl guebja njnl), ur unq cebprrqrq
gbjneqf gur bevragny rqvsvpr bs gur Ghexvfu naq Jnez Onguf, 11 Yrvafgre
fgerrg, jvgu gur yvtug bs vafcvengvba fuvavat va uvf pbhagranapr naq
ornevat va uvf nezf gur frperg bs gur enpr, tenira va gur ynathntr bs
cerqvpgvba.

Jung dhnyvslvat pbafvqrengvbaf nyynlrq uvf cregheongvbaf?

Gur qvssvphygvrf bs vagrecergngvba fvapr gur fvtavsvpnapr bs nal rirag
sbyybjrq vgf bppheerapr nf inevnoyl nf gur npbhfgvp ercbeg sbyybjrq gur
ryrpgevpny qvfpunetr naq bs pbhagrerfgvzngvat ntnvafg na npghny ybff ol
snvyher gb vagrecerg gur gbgny fhz bs cbffvoyr ybffrf cebprrqvat
bevtvanyyl sebz n fhpprffshy vagrecergngvba.

Uvf zbbq?

Ur unq abg evfxrq, ur qvq abg rkcrpg, ur unq abg orra qvfnccbvagrq, ur
jnf fngvfsvrq.

Jung fngvfsvrq uvz?

Gb unir fhfgnvarq ab cbfvgvir ybff. Gb unir oebhtug n cbfvgvir tnva gb
bguref. Yvtug gb gur tragvyrf.

Ubj qvq Oybbz cercner n pbyyngvba sbe n tragvyr?

Ur cbherq vagb gjb grnphcf gjb yriry fcbbashyf, sbhe va nyy, bs Rccf'f
fbyhoyr pbpbn naq cebprrqrq nppbeqvat gb gur qverpgvbaf sbe hfr cevagrq
ba gur ynory, gb rnpu nqqvat nsgre fhssvpvrag gvzr sbe vashfvba gur
cerfpevorq vaterqvragf sbe qvsshfvba va gur znaare naq va gur dhnagvgl
cerfpevorq.

Jung fhcrerebtngbel znexf bs fcrpvny ubfcvgnyvgl qvq gur ubfg fubj uvf
thrfg?

Eryvadhvfuvat uvf flzcbfvnepuny evtug gb gur zbhfgnpur phc bs vzvgngvba
Pebja Qreol cerfragrq gb uvz ol uvf bayl qnhtugre, Zvyyvprag (Zvyyl), ur
fhofgvghgrq n phc vqragvpny jvgu gung bs uvf thrfg naq freirq
rkgenbeqvanevyl gb uvf thrfg naq, va erqhprq zrnfher, gb uvzfrys gur
ivfpbhf pernz beqvanevyl erfreirq sbe gur oernxsnfg bs uvf jvsr Znevba
(Zbyyl).

Jnf gur thrfg pbafpvbhf bs naq qvq ur npxabjyrqtr gurfr znexf bs
ubfcvgnyvgl?

Uvf nggragvba jnf qverpgrq gb gurz ol uvf ubfg wbpbfryl, naq ur npprcgrq
gurz frevbhfyl nf gurl qenax va wbpbfrevbhf fvyrapr Rccf'f znffcebqhpg,
gur perngher pbpbn.

Jrer gurer znexf bs ubfcvgnyvgl juvpu ur pbagrzcyngrq ohg fhccerffrq,
erfreivat gurz sbe nabgure naq sbe uvzfrys ba shgher bppnfvbaf gb
pbzcyrgr gur npg ortha?

Gur ercnengvba bs n svffher bs gur yratgu bs 1 1/2 vapurf va gur evtug
fvqr bs uvf thrfg'f wnpxrg. N tvsg gb uvf thrfg bs bar bs gur sbhe ynql'f
unaqxrepuvrsf, vs naq jura nfpregnvarq gb or va n cerfragnoyr pbaqvgvba.

Jub qenax zber dhvpxyl?

Oybbz, univat gur nqinagntr bs gra frpbaqf ng gur vavgvngvba naq gnxvat,
sebz gur pbapnir fhesnpr bs n fcbba nybat gur unaqyr bs juvpu n fgrnql
sybj bs urng jnf pbaqhpgrq, guerr fvcf gb uvf bccbarag'f bar, fvk gb gjb,
avar gb guerr.

Jung preroengvba nppbzcnavrq uvf serdhragngvir npg?

Pbapyhqvat ol vafcrpgvba ohg reebarbhfyl gung uvf fvyrag pbzcnavba jnf
ratntrq va zragny pbzcbfvgvba ur ersyrpgrq ba gur cyrnfherf qrevirq sebz
yvgrengher bs vafgehpgvba engure guna bs nzhfrzrag nf ur uvzfrys unq
nccyvrq gb gur jbexf bs Jvyyvnz Funxrfcrner zber guna bapr sbe gur
fbyhgvba bs qvssvphyg ceboyrzf va vzntvanel be erny yvsr.

Unq ur sbhaq gurve fbyhgvba?

Va fcvgr bs pnershy naq ercrngrq ernqvat bs pregnva pynffvpny cnffntrf,
nvqrq ol n tybffnel, ur unq qrevirq vzcresrpg pbaivpgvba sebz gur grkg,
gur nafjref abg ornevat va nyy cbvagf.

Jung yvarf pbapyhqrq uvf svefg cvrpr bs bevtvany irefr jevggra ol uvz,
cbgragvny cbrg, ng gur ntr bs 11 va 1877 ba gur bppnfvba bs gur bssrevat
bs guerr cevmrf bs 10/-, 5/- naq 2/6 erfcrpgviryl sbe pbzcrgvgvba ol gur
FUNZEBPX, n jrrxyl arjfcncre?


    NA NZOVGVBA GB FDHVAG
    NG ZL IREFRF VA CEVAG
    ZNXRF ZR UBCR GUNG SBE GURFR LBH'YY SVAQ EBBZ.
    VS LBH FB PBAQRFPRAQ
    GURA CYRNFR CYNPR NG GUR RAQ
    GUR ANZR BS LBHEF GEHYL, Y. OYBBZ.


Qvq ur svaq sbhe frcnengvat sbeprf orgjrra uvf grzcbenel thrfg naq uvz?

Anzr, ntr, enpr, perrq.

Jung nantenzf unq ur znqr ba uvf anzr va lbhgu?


    Yrbcbyq Oybbz
    Ryycbqobzbby
    Zbyyqbcrybbo
    Obyybcrqbbz
    Byq Byyrob, Z. C.


Jung npebfgvp hcba gur nooerivngvba bs uvf svefg anzr unq ur (xvargvp
cbrg) frag gb Zvff Znevba (Zbyyl) Gjrrql ba gur 14 Sroehnel 1888?

    CBRGF BSG UNIR FHAT VA EULZR
    BS ZHFVP FJRRG GURVE CENVFR QVIVAR.
    YRG GURZ ULZA VG AVAR GVZRF AVAR.
    QRNERE SNE GUNA FBAT BE JVAR.
    LBH NER ZVAR. GUR JBEYQ VF ZVAR.


Jung unq ceriragrq uvz sebz pbzcyrgvat n gbcvpny fbat (zhfvp ol E. T.
Wbuafgba) ba gur riragf bs gur cnfg, be svkgherf sbe gur npghny, lrnef,
ragvgyrq VS OEVNA OBEH PBHYQ OHG PBZR ONPX NAQ FRR BYQ QHOYVA ABJ,
pbzzvffvbarq ol Zvpunry Thaa, yrffrr bs gur Tnvrgl Gurnger, 46, 47, 48,
49 Fbhgu Xvat fgerrg, naq gb or vagebqhprq vagb gur fvkgu fprar, gur
inyyrl bs qvnzbaqf, bs gur frpbaq rqvgvba (30 Wnahnel 1893) bs gur tenaq
naahny Puevfgznf cnagbzvzr FVAONQ GUR FNVYBE (cebqhprq ol E Furygba 26
Qrprzore 1892, jevggra ol Terrayrns Juvggvre, fprarel ol Trbetr N.
Wnpxfba naq Prpvy Uvpxf, pbfghzrf ol Zef naq Zvff Juryna haqre gur
crefbany fhcreivfvba bs Zef Zvpunry Thaa, onyyrgf ol Wrffvr Abve,
uneyrdhvanqr ol Gubznf Bggb) naq fhat ol Aryyl Obhirevfg, cevapvcny tvey?

Svefgyl, bfpvyyngvba orgjrra riragf bs vzcrevny naq bs ybpny vagrerfg,
gur nagvpvcngrq qvnzbaq whovyrr bs Dhrra Ivpgbevn (obea 1820, npprqrq
1837) naq gur cbfgvpvcngrq bcravat bs gur arj zhavpvcny svfu znexrg:
frpbaqyl, nccerurafvba bs bccbfvgvba sebz rkgerzr pvepyrf ba gur
dhrfgvbaf bs gur erfcrpgvir ivfvgf bs Gurve Eblny Uvtuarffrf gur qhxr naq
qhpurff bs Lbex (erny) naq bs Uvf Znwrfgl Xvat Oevna Obeh (vzntvanel):
guveqyl, n pbasyvpg orgjrra cebsrffvbany rgvdhrggr naq cebsrffvbany
rzhyngvba pbapreavat gur erprag rerpgvbaf bs gur Tenaq Ylevp Unyy ba
Ohetu Dhnl naq gur Gurnger Eblny va Unjxvaf fgerrg: sbheguyl, qvfgenpgvba
erfhygnag sebz pbzcnffvba sbe Aryyl Obhirevfg'f aba-vagryyrpghny, aba-
cbyvgvpny, aba-gbcvpny rkcerffvba bs pbhagranapr naq pbaphcvfprapr pnhfrq
ol Aryyl Obhirevfg'f eriryngvbaf bs juvgr negvpyrf bs aba-vagryyrpghny,
aba-cbyvgvpny, aba-gbcvpny haqrepybguvat juvyr fur (Aryyl Obhirevfg) jnf
va gur negvpyrf: svsguyl, gur qvssvphygvrf bs gur fryrpgvba bs
nccebcevngr zhfvp naq uhzbebhf nyyhfvbaf sebz RIRELOBQL'F OBBX BS WBXRF
(1000 cntrf naq n ynhtu va rirel bar): fvkguyl, gur eulzrf, ubzbcubabhf
naq pnpbcubabhf, nffbpvngrq jvgu gur anzrf bs gur arj ybeq znlbe, Qnavry
Gnyyba, gur arj uvtu furevss, Gubznf Cvyr naq gur arj fbyvpvgbetrareny,
Qhaone Cyhaxrg Onegba.

Jung eryngvba rkvfgrq orgjrra gurve ntrf?

16 lrnef orsber va 1888 jura Oybbz jnf bs Fgrcura'f cerfrag ntr Fgrcura
jnf 6. 16 lrnef nsgre va 1920 jura Fgrcura jbhyq or bs Oybbz'f cerfrag
ntr Oybbz jbhyq or 54. Va 1936 jura Oybbz jbhyq or 70 naq Fgrcura 54
gurve ntrf vavgvnyyl va gur engvb bs 16 gb 0 jbhyq or nf 17 1/2 gb 13
1/2, gur cebcbegvba vapernfvat naq gur qvfcnevgl qvzvavfuvat nppbeqvat nf
neovgenel shgher lrnef jrer nqqrq, sbe vs gur cebcbegvba rkvfgvat va 1883
unq pbagvahrq vzzhgnoyr, pbaprvivat gung gb or cbffvoyr, gvyy gura 1904
jura Fgrcura jnf 22 Oybbz jbhyq or 374 naq va 1920 jura Fgrcura jbhyq or
38, nf Oybbz gura jnf, Oybbz jbhyq or 646 juvyr va 1952 jura Fgrcura
jbhyq unir nggnvarq gur znkvzhz cbfgqvyhivna ntr bs 70 Oybbz, orvat 1190
lrnef nyvir univat orra obea va gur lrne 714, jbhyq unir fhecnffrq ol 221
lrnef gur znkvzhz nagrqvyhivna ntr, gung bs Zrguhfnynu, 969 lrnef, juvyr,
vs Fgrcura jbhyq pbagvahr gb yvir hagvy ur jbhyq nggnva gung ntr va gur
lrne 3072 N.Q., Oybbzjbhyq unir orra boyvtrq gb unir orra nyvir 83,300
lrnef, univat orra boyvtrq gb unir orra obea va gur lrne 81,396 O.P.

Jung riragf zvtug ahyyvsl gurfr pnyphyngvbaf?

Gur prffngvba bs rkvfgrapr bs obgu be rvgure, gur vanhthengvba bs n arj
ren be pnyraqne, gur naavuvyngvba bs gur jbeyq naq pbafrdhrag
rkgrezvangvba bs gur uhzna fcrpvrf, varivgnoyr ohg vzcerqvpgnoyr.

Ubj znal cerivbhf rapbhagref cebirq gurve cerrkvfgvat npdhnvagnapr?

Gjb. Gur svefg va gur yvynptneqra bs Znggurj Qvyyba'f ubhfr, Zrqvan
Ivyyn, Xvzzntr ebnq, Ebhaqgbja, va 1887, va gur pbzcnal bs Fgrcura'f
zbgure, Fgrcura orvat gura bs gur ntr bs 5 naq eryhpgnag gb tvir uvf unaq
va fnyhgngvba. Gur frpbaq va gur pbssrrebbz bs Oerfyva'f ubgry ba n enval
Fhaqnl va gur Wnahnel bs 1892, va gur pbzcnal bs Fgrcura'f sngure naq
Fgrcura'f tenaqhapyr, Fgrcura orvat gura 5 lrnef byqre.

Qvq Oybbz npprcg gur vaivgngvba gb qvaare tvira gura ol gur fba naq
nsgrejneqf frpbaqrq ol gur sngure?

Irel tengrshyyl, jvgu tengrshy nccerpvngvba, jvgu fvaprer nccerpvngvir
tengvghqr, va nccerpvngviryl tengrshy fvaprevgl bs erterg, ur qrpyvarq.

Qvq gurve pbairefngvba ba gur fhowrpg bs gurfr erzvavfpraprf erirny n
guveq pbaarpgvat yvax orgjrra gurz?

Zef Evbeqna (Qnagr), n jvqbj bs vaqrcraqrag zrnaf, unq erfvqrq va gur
ubhfr bs Fgrcura'f cneragf sebz 1 Frcgrzore 1888 gb 29 Qrprzore 1891 naq
unq nyfb erfvqrq qhevat gur lrnef 1892, 1893 naq 1894 va gur Pvgl Nezf
Ubgry bjarq ol Ryvmnorgu B'Qbjq bs 54 Cehffvn fgerrg jurer, qhevat cnegf
bs gur lrnef 1893 naq 1894, fur unq orra n pbafgnag vasbeznag bs Oybbz
jub erfvqrq nyfb va gur fnzr ubgry, orvat ng gung gvzr n pyrex va gur
rzcyblzrag bs Wbfrcu Phssr bs 5 Fzvgusvryq sbe gur fhcrevagraqrapr bs
fnyrf va gur nqwnprag Qhoyva Pnggyr znexrg ba gur Abegu Pvephyne ebnq.

Unq ur cresbezrq nal fcrpvny pbecbeny jbex bs zrepl sbe ure?

Ur unq fbzrgvzrf cebcryyrq ure ba jnez fhzzre riravatf, na vasvez jvqbj
bs vaqrcraqrag, vs yvzvgrq, zrnaf, va ure pbainyrfprag ongupunve jvgu
fybj eribyhgvbaf bs vgf jurryf nf sne nf gur pbeare bs gur Abegu Pvephyne
ebnq bccbfvgr Ze Tniva Ybj'f cynpr bs ohfvarff jurer fur unq erznvarq sbe
n pregnva gvzr fpnaavat guebhtu uvf baryrafrq ovabphyne svryqtynffrf
haerpbtavfnoyr pvgvmraf ba genzpnef, ebnqfgre ovplpyrf rdhvccrq jvgu
vasyngrq carhzngvp glerf, unpxarl pneevntrf, gnaqrzf, cevingr naq uverq
ynaqnhf, qbtpnegf, cbalgencf naq oenxrf cnffvat sebz gur pvgl gb gur
Cubravk Cnex naq ivpr irefn.

Jul pbhyq ur gura fhccbeg gung uvf ivtvy jvgu gur terngre rdhnavzvgl?

Orpnhfr va zvqqyr lbhgu ur unq bsgra fng bofreivat guebhtu n ebaqry bs
obffrq tynff bs n zhygvpbybherq cnar gur fcrpgnpyr bssrerq jvgu pbagvahny
punatrf bs gur gubebhtusner jvgubhg, crqrfgevnaf, dhnqehcrqf,
irybpvcrqrf, iruvpyrf, cnffvat fybjyl, dhvpxyl, rirayl, ebhaq naq ebhaq
naq ebhaq gur evz bs n ebhaq naq ebhaq cerpvcvgbhf tybor.

Jung qvfgvapg qvssrerag zrzbevrf unq rnpu bs ure abj rvtug lrnef
qrprnfrq?

Gur byqre, ure ormvdhr pneqf naq pbhagref, ure Fxlr greevre, ure
fhccbfvgvbhf jrnygu, ure yncfrf bs erfcbafvirarff naq vapvcvrag pngneeuny
qrnsarff: gur lbhatre, ure ynzc bs pbymn bvy orsber gur fgnghr bs gur
Vzznphyngr Pbaprcgvba, ure terra naq znebba oehfurf sbe Puneyrf Fgrjneg
Cnearyy naq sbe Zvpunry Qnivgg, ure gvffhr cncref.

Jrer gurer ab zrnaf fgvyy erznvavat gb uvz gb npuvrir gur erwhirangvba
juvpu gurfr erzvavfpraprf qvihytrq gb n lbhatre pbzcnavba eraqrerq gur
zber qrfvenoyr?

Gur vaqbbe rkrepvfrf, sbezreyl vagrezvggragyl cenpgvfrq, fhofrdhragyl
nonaqbarq, cerfpevorq va Rhtra Fnaqbj'f CULFVPNY FGERATGU NAQ UBJ GB
BOGNVA VG juvpu, qrfvtarq cnegvphyneyl sbe pbzzrepvny zra ratntrq va
frqragnel bpphcngvbaf, jrer gb or znqr jvgu zragny pbapragengvba va sebag
bs n zveebe fb nf gb oevat vagb cynl gur inevbhf snzvyvrf bs zhfpyrf naq
cebqhpr fhpprffviryl n cyrnfnag evtvqvgl, n zber cyrnfnag erynkngvba naq
gur zbfg cyrnfnag ercevfgvangvba bs whiravyr ntvyvgl.

Unq nal fcrpvny ntvyvgl orra uvf va rneyvre lbhgu?

Gubhtu evatjrvtug yvsgvat unq orra orlbaq uvf fgeratgu naq gur shyy
pvepyr tlengvba orlbaq uvf pbhentr lrg nf n Uvtu fpubby fpubyne ur unq
rkpryyrq va uvf fgnoyr naq cebgenpgrq rkrphgvba bs gur unys yrire
zbirzrag ba gur cnenyyry onef va pbafrdhrapr bs uvf noabeznyyl qrirybcrq
noqbzvany zhfpyrf.

Qvq rvgure bcrayl nyyhqr gb gurve enpvny qvssrerapr?

Arvgure.

Jung, erqhprq gb gurve fvzcyrfg erpvcebpny sbez, jrer Oybbz'f gubhtugf
nobhg Fgrcura'f gubhtugf nobhg Oybbz naq nobhg Fgrcura'f gubhtugf nobhg
Oybbz'f gubhtugf nobhg Fgrcura?

Ur gubhtug gung ur gubhtug gung ur jnf n wrj jurernf ur xarj gung ur xarj
gung ur xarj gung ur jnf abg.

Jung, gur rapybfherf bs ergvprapr erzbirq, jrer gurve erfcrpgvir
cneragntrf?

Oybbz, bayl obea znyr genafhofgnagvny urve bs Ehqbys Ivent (fhofrdhragyl
Ehqbycu Oybbz) bs Fmbzonguryl, Ivraan, Ohqncrfg, Zvyna, Ybaqba naq Qhoyva
naq bs Ryyra Uvttvaf, frpbaq qnhtugre bs Whyvhf Uvttvaf (obea Xnebyl) naq
Snaal Uvttvaf (obea Urtnegl). Fgrcura, ryqrfg fheivivat znyr
pbafhofgnagvny urve bs Fvzba Qrqnyhf bs Pbex naq Qhoyva naq bs Znel,
qnhtugre bs Evpuneq naq Puevfgvan Tbhyqvat (obea Tevre).

Unq Oybbz naq Fgrcura orra oncgvfrq, naq jurer naq ol jubz, pyrevp be
ynlzna?

Oybbz (guerr gvzrf), ol gur erireraq Ze Tvyzre Wbuafgba Z. N., nybar, va
gur cebgrfgnag puhepu bs Fnvag Avpubynf Jvgubhg, Pbbzor, ol Wnzrf
B'Pbaabe, Cuvyvc Tvyyvtna naq Wnzrf Svgmcngevpx, gbtrgure, haqre n chzc
va gur ivyyntr bs Fjbeqf, naq ol gur erireraq Puneyrf Znybar P. P., va
gur puhepu bs gur Guerr Cngebaf, Engutne. Fgrcura (bapr) ol gur erireraq
Puneyrf Znybar P. P., nybar, va gur puhepu bs gur Guerr Cngebaf, Engutne.

Qvq gurl svaq gurve rqhpngvbany pnerref fvzvyne?

Fhofgvghgvat Fgrcura sbe Oybbz Fgbbz jbhyq unir cnffrq fhpprffviryl
guebhtu n qnzr'f fpubby naq gur uvtu fpubby. Fhofgvghgvat Oybbz sbe
Fgrcura Oyrcura jbhyq unir cnffrq fhpprffviryl guebhtu gur cercnengbel,
whavbe, zvqqyr naq fravbe tenqrf bs gur vagrezrqvngr naq guebhtu gur
zngevphyngvba, svefg negf, frpbaq negf naq negf qrterr pbhefrf bs gur
eblny havirefvgl.

Jul qvq Oybbz ersenva sebz fgngvat gung ur unq serdhragrq gur havirefvgl
bs yvsr?

Orpnhfr bs uvf syhpghngvat vapregvghqr nf gb jurgure guvf bofreingvba unq
be unq abg orra nyernql znqr ol uvz gb Fgrcura be ol Fgrcura gb uvz.

Jung gjb grzcrenzragf qvq gurl vaqvivqhnyyl ercerfrag?

Gur fpvragvsvp. Gur negvfgvp.

Jung cebbsf qvq Oybbz nqqhpr gb cebir gung uvf graqrapl jnf gbjneqf
nccyvrq, engure guna gbjneqf cher, fpvrapr?

Pregnva cbffvoyr vairagvbaf bs juvpu ur unq pbtvgngrq jura erpyvavat va n
fgngr bs fhcvar ercyrgvba gb nvq qvtrfgvba, fgvzhyngrq ol uvf
nccerpvngvba bs gur vzcbegnapr bs vairagvbaf abj pbzzba ohg bapr
eribyhgvbanel, sbe rknzcyr, gur nrebanhgvp cnenpuhgr, gur ersyrpgvat
gryrfpbcr, gur fcveny pbexfperj, gur fnsrgl cva, gur zvareny jngre
fvcuba, gur pnany ybpx jvgu jvapu naq fyhvpr, gur fhpgvba chzc.

Jrer gurfr vairagvbaf cevapvcnyyl vagraqrq sbe na vzcebirq fpurzr bs
xvaqretnegra?

Lrf, eraqrevat bofbyrgr cbcthaf, rynfgvp nveoynqqref, tnzrf bs unmneq,
pngnchygf. Gurl pbzcevfrq nfgebabzvpny xnyrvqbfpbcrf rkuvovgvat gur
gjryir pbafgryyngvbaf bs gur mbqvnp sebz Nevrf gb Cvfprf, zvavngher
zrpunavpny beerevrf, nevguzrgvpny tryngvar ybmratrf, trbzrgevpny gb
pbeerfcbaq jvgu mbbybtvpny ovfphvgf, tyborznc cynlvat onyyf, uvfgbevpnyyl
pbfghzrq qbyyf.

Jung nyfb fgvzhyngrq uvz va uvf pbtvgngvbaf?

Gur svanapvny fhpprff npuvrirq ol Rcuenvz Znexf naq Puneyrf N. Wnzrf, gur
sbezre ol uvf 1q onmnne ng 42 Trbetr'f fgerrg, fbhgu, gur ynggre ng uvf
6-1/2q fubc naq jbeyq'f snapl snve naq jnkjbex rkuvovgvba ng 30 Urael
fgerrg, nqzvffvba 2q, puvyqera 1q: naq gur vasvavgr cbffvovyvgvrf
uvguregb harkcybvgrq bs gur zbqrea neg bs nqiregvfrzrag vs pbaqrafrq va
gevyvgreny zbabvqrny flzobyf, iregvpnyyl bs znkvzhz ivfvovyvgl (qvivarq),
ubevmbagnyyl bs znkvzhz yrtvovyvgl (qrpvcurerq) naq bs zntargvfvat
rssvpnpl gb neerfg vaibyhagnel nggragvba, gb vagrerfg, gb pbaivapr, gb
qrpvqr.

Fhpu nf?

X. VV. Xvab'f 11/- Gebhfref. Ubhfr bs Xrlf. Nyrknaqre W. Xrlrf.

Fhpu nf abg?

Ybbx ng guvf ybat pnaqyr. Pnyphyngr jura vg oheaf bhg naq lbh erprvir
tengvf 1 cnve bs bhe fcrpvny aba-pbzcb obbgf, thnenagrrq 1 pnaqyr cbjre.
Nqqerff: Onepynl naq Pbbx, 18 Gnyobg fgerrg.

Onpvyvxvy (Vafrpg Cbjqre). Irevorfg (Obbg Oynpxvat). Hjnagvg (Pbzovarq
cbpxrg gjboynqr craxavsr jvgu pbexfperj, anvysvyr naq cvcrpyrnare).

Fhpu nf arire?

Jung vf ubzr jvgubhg Cyhzgerr'f Cbggrq Zrng?

Vapbzcyrgr.

Jvgu vg na nobqr bs oyvff.

Znahsnpgherq ol Trbetr Cyhzgerr, 23 Zrepunagf' dhnl, Qhoyva, chg hc va 4
bm cbgf, naq vafregrq ol Pbhapvyybe Wbfrcu C. Anaarggv, Z. C., Ebghaqn
Jneq, 19 Uneqjvpxr fgerrg, haqre gur bovghnel abgvprf naq naavirefnevrf
bs qrprnfrf. Gur anzr ba gur ynory vf Cyhzgerr. N cyhzgerr va n zrngcbg,
ertvfgrerq genqr znex. Orjner bs vzvgngvbaf. Crngzbg. Gehzcyrr. Zbhgcng.
Cynzgebb.

Juvpu rknzcyr qvq ur nqqhpr gb vaqhpr Fgrcura gb qrqhpr gung bevtvanyvgl,
gubhtu cebqhpvat vgf bja erjneq, qbrf abg vainevnoyl pbaqhpr gb fhpprff?

Uvf bja vqrngrq naq erwrpgrq cebwrpg bs na vyyhzvangrq fubjpneg, qenja ol
n ornfg bs oheqra, va juvpu gjb fznegyl qerffrq tveyf jrer gb or frngrq
ratntrq va jevgvat.

Jung fhttrfgrq fprar jnf gura pbafgehpgrq ol Fgrcura?

Fbyvgnel ubgry va zbhagnva cnff. Nhghza. Gjvyvtug. Sver yvg. Va qnex
pbeare lbhat zna frngrq. Lbhat jbzna ragref. Erfgyrff. Fbyvgnel. Fur
fvgf. Fur tbrf gb jvaqbj. Fur fgnaqf. Fur fvgf. Gjvyvtug. Fur guvaxf. Ba
fbyvgnel ubgry cncre fur jevgrf. Fur guvaxf. Fur jevgrf. Fur fvtuf.
Jurryf naq ubbsf. Fur uheevrf bhg. Ur pbzrf sebz uvf qnex pbeare. Ur
frvmrf fbyvgnel cncre. Ur ubyqf vg gbjneqf sver. Gjvyvtug. Ur ernqf.
Fbyvgnel.

Jung?

Va fybcvat, hcevtug naq onpxunaqf: Dhrra'f Ubgry, Dhrra'f Ubgry, Dhrra'f
Ubgry. Dhrra'f Ub...

Jung fhttrfgrq fprar jnf gura erpbafgehpgrq ol Oybbz?

Gur Dhrra'f Ubgry, Raavf, pbhagl Pyner, jurer Ehqbycu Oybbz (Ehqbys
Ivent) qvrq ba gur riravat bs gur 27 Whar 1886, ng fbzr ubhe hafgngrq, va
pbafrdhrapr bs na bireqbfr bs zbaxfubbq (npbavgr) frysnqzvavfgrerq va gur
sbez bs n arhenytvp yvavzrag pbzcbfrq bs 2 cnegf bs npbavgr yvavzrag gb V
bs puybebsbez yvavzrag (chepunfrq ol uvz ng 10.20 n.z. ba gur zbeavat bs
27 Whar 1886 ng gur zrqvpny unyy bs Senapvf Qraarul, 17 Puhepu fgerrg,
Raavf) nsgre univat, gubhtu abg va pbafrdhrapr bs univat, chepunfrq ng
3.15 c.z. ba gur nsgreabba bs 27 Whar 1886 n arj obngre fgenj ung, rkgen
fzneg (nsgre univat, gubhtu abg va pbafrdhrapr bs univat, chepunfrq ng
gur ubhe naq va gur cynpr nsberfnvq, gur gbkva nsberfnvq), ng gur trareny
qencrel fgber bs Wnzrf Phyyra, 4 Znva fgerrg, Raavf.

Qvq ur nggevohgr guvf ubzbalzvgl gb vasbezngvba be pbvapvqrapr be
vaghvgvba?

Pbvapvqrapr.

Qvq ur qrcvpg gur fprar ireonyyl sbe uvf thrfg gb frr?

Ur cersreerq uvzfrys gb frr nabgure'f snpr naq yvfgra gb nabgure'f jbeqf
ol juvpu cbgragvny aneengvba jnf ernyvfrq naq xvargvp grzcrenzrag
eryvrirq.

Qvq ur frr bayl n frpbaq pbvapvqrapr va gur frpbaq fprar aneengrq gb uvz,
qrfpevorq ol gur aneengbe nf N CVFTNU FVTUG BS CNYRFGVAR BE GUR CNENOYR
BS GUR CYHZF?

Vg, jvgu gur cerprqvat fprar naq jvgu bguref haaneengrq ohg rkvfgrag ol
vzcyvpngvba, gb juvpu nqq rffnlf ba inevbhf fhowrpgf be zbeny ncbgurtzf
(r.t. ZL SNIBHEVGR UREB BE CEBPENFGVANGVBA VF GUR GUVRS BS GVZR) pbzcbfrq
qhevat fpubbylrnef, frrzrq gb uvz gb pbagnva va vgfrys naq va pbawhapgvba
jvgu gur crefbany rdhngvba pregnva cbffvovyvgvrf bs svanapvny, fbpvny,
crefbany naq frkhny fhpprff, jurgure fcrpvnyyl pbyyrpgrq naq fryrpgrq nf
zbqry crqntbtvp gurzrf (bs prag cre prag zrevg) sbe gur hfr bs
cercnengbel naq whavbe tenqr fghqragf be pbagevohgrq va cevagrq sbez,
sbyybjvat gur cerprqrag bs Cuvyvc Ornhsbl be Qbpgbe Qvpx be Uroyba'f
FGHQVRF VA OYHR, gb n choyvpngvba bs pregvsvrq pvephyngvba naq fbyirapl
be rzcyblrq ireonyyl nf vagryyrpghny fgvzhyngvba sbe flzcngurgvp
nhqvgbef, gnpvgyl nccerpvngvir bs fhpprffshy aneengvir naq pbasvqragyl
nhthengvir bs fhpprffshy npuvrirzrag, qhevat gur vapernfvatyl ybatre
avtugf tenqhnyyl sbyybjvat gur fhzzre fbyfgvpr ba gur qnl ohg guerr
sbyybjvat, ivqryvprg, Ghrfqnl, 21 Whar (F. Nyblfvhf Tbamntn), fhaevfr
3.33 n.z., fhafrg 8.29 c.z.

Juvpu qbzrfgvp ceboyrz nf zhpu nf, vs abg zber guna, nal bgure serdhragyl
ratntrq uvf zvaq?

Jung gb qb jvgu bhe jvirf.

Jung unq orra uvf ulcbgurgvpny fvathyne fbyhgvbaf?

Cneybhe tnzrf (qbzvabf, unyzn, gvqqyrqljvaxf, fcvyvxvaf, phc naq onyy,
anc, fcbvy svir, ormvdhr, gjraglsvir, orttne zl arvtuobhe, qenhtugf,
purff be onpxtnzzba): rzoebvqrel, qneavat be xavggvat sbe gur cbyvprnvqrq
pybguvat fbpvrgl: zhfvpny qhrgf, znaqbyvar naq thvgne, cvnab naq syhgr,
thvgne naq cvnab: yrtny fpevirarel be rairybcr nqqerffvat: ovjrrxyl
ivfvgf gb inevrgl ragregnvazragf: pbzzrepvny npgvivgl nf cyrnfnagyl
pbzznaqvat naq cyrnfvatyl borlrq zvfgerff cebcevrgerff va n pbby qnvel
fubc be jnez pvtne qvina: gur pynaqrfgvar fngvfsnpgvba bs rebgvp
veevgngvba va znfphyvar oebguryf, fgngr vafcrpgrq naq zrqvpnyyl
pbagebyyrq: fbpvny ivfvgf, ng erthyne vaserdhrag ceriragrq vagreinyf naq
jvgu erthyne serdhrag ceriragvir fhcrevagraqrapr, gb naq sebz srznyr
npdhnvagnaprf bs erpbtavfrq erfcrpgnovyvgl va gur ivpvavgl: pbhefrf bs
riravat vafgehpgvba fcrpvnyyl qrfvtarq gb eraqre yvoreny vafgehpgvba
nterrnoyr.

Jung vafgnaprf bs qrsvpvrag zragny qrirybczrag va uvf jvsr vapyvarq uvz
va snibhe bs gur ynfgzragvbarq (avagu) fbyhgvba?

Va qvfbpphcvrq zbzragf fur unq zber guna bapr pbirerq n furrg bs cncre
jvgu fvtaf naq uvrebtylcuvpf juvpu fur fgngrq jrer Terrx naq Vevfu naq
Uroerj punenpgref. Fur unq vagreebtngrq pbafgnagyl ng inelvat vagreinyf
nf gb gur pbeerpg zrgubq bs jevgvat gur pncvgny vavgvny bs gur anzr bs n
pvgl va Pnanqn, Dhrorp. Fur haqrefgbbq yvggyr bs cbyvgvpny pbzcyvpngvbaf,
vagreany, be onynapr bs cbjre, rkgreany. Va pnyphyngvat gur nqqraqn bs
ovyyf fur serdhragyl unq erpbhefr gb qvtvgny nvq. Nsgre pbzcyrgvba bs
ynpbavp rcvfgbynel pbzcbfvgvbaf fur nonaqbarq gur vzcyrzrag bs
pnyyvtencul va gur rapnhfgvp cvtzrag, rkcbfrq gb gur pbeebfvir npgvba bs
pbccrenf, terra ivgevby naq ahgtnyy. Hahfhny cbylflyynoyrf bs sbervta
bevtva fur vagrecergrq cubargvpnyyl be ol snyfr nanybtl be ol obgu:
zrgrzcflpubfvf (zrg uvz cvxr ubfrf), NYVNF (n zraqnpvbhf crefba zragvbarq
va fnperq fpevcgher).

Jung pbzcrafngrq va gur snyfr onynapr bs ure vagryyvtrapr sbe gurfr naq
fhpu qrsvpvrapvrf bs whqtzrag ertneqvat crefbaf, cynprf naq guvatf?

Gur snyfr nccnerag cnenyyryvfz bs nyy crecraqvphyne nezf bs nyy onynaprf,
cebirq gehr ol pbafgehpgvba. Gur pbhagreonynapr bs ure cebsvpvrapl bs
whqtzrag ertneqvat bar crefba, cebirq gehr ol rkcrevzrag.

Ubj unq ur nggrzcgrq gb erzrql guvf fgngr bs pbzcnengvir vtabenapr?

Inevbhfyl. Ol yrnivat va n pbafcvphbhf cynpr n pregnva obbx bcra ng n
pregnva cntr: ol nffhzvat va ure, jura nyyhqvat rkcynangbevyl, yngrag
xabjyrqtr: ol bcra evqvphyr va ure cerfrapr bs fbzr nofrag bgure'f
vtabenag yncfr.

Jvgu jung fhpprff unq ur nggrzcgrq qverpg vafgehpgvba?

Fur sbyybjrq abg nyy, n cneg bs gur jubyr, tnir nggragvba jvgu vagrerfg
pbzceruraqrq jvgu fhecevfr, jvgu pner ercrngrq, jvgu terngre qvssvphygl
erzrzorerq, sbetbg jvgu rnfr, jvgu zvftvivat ererzrzorerq, erercrngrq
jvgu reebe.

Jung flfgrz unq cebirq zber rssrpgvir?

Vaqverpg fhttrfgvba vzcyvpngvat frysvagrerfg.

Rknzcyr?

Fur qvfyvxrq hzoeryyn jvgu enva, ur yvxrq jbzna jvgu hzoeryyn, fur
qvfyvxrq arj ung jvgu enva, ur yvxrq jbzna jvgu arj ung, ur obhtug arj
ung jvgu enva, fur pneevrq hzoeryyn jvgu arj ung.

Npprcgvat gur nanybtl vzcyvrq va uvf thrfg'f cnenoyr juvpu rknzcyrf bs
cbfgrkvyvp rzvarapr qvq ur nqqhpr?

Guerr frrxref bs gur cher gehgu, Zbfrf bs Rtlcg, Zbfrf Znvzbavqrf, nhgube
bs ZBER AROHXVZ (Thvqr bs gur Crecyrkrq) naq Zbfrf Zraqryffbua bs fhpu
rzvarapr gung sebz Zbfrf (bs Rtlcg) gb Zbfrf (Zraqryffbua) gurer nebfr
abar yvxr Zbfrf (Znvzbavqrf).

Jung fgngrzrag jnf znqr, haqre pbeerpgvba, ol Oybbz pbapreavat n sbhegu
frrxre bs cher gehgu, ol anzr Nevfgbgyr, zragvbarq, jvgu crezvffvba, ol
Fgrcura?

Gung gur frrxre zragvbarq unq orra n chcvy bs n enoovavpny cuvybfbcure,
anzr hapregnva.

Jrer bgure nancbpelcuny vyyhfgevbhf fbaf bs gur ynj naq puvyqera bs n
fryrpgrq be erwrpgrq enpr zragvbarq?

Sryvk Onegubyql Zraqryffbua (pbzcbfre), Onehpu Fcvabmn (cuvybfbcure),
Zraqbmn (chtvyvfg), Sreqvanaq Ynffnyyr (ersbezre, qhryyvfg).

Jung sentzragf bs irefr sebz gur napvrag Uroerj naq napvrag Vevfu
ynathntrf jrer pvgrq jvgu zbqhyngvbaf bs ibvpr naq genafyngvba bs grkgf
ol thrfg gb ubfg naq ol ubfg gb thrfg?

Ol Fgrcura: FHVY, FHVY, FHVY NEHA, FHVY TB FVBPNVE NTHF FHVY TB PHVA
(jnyx, jnyx, jnyx lbhe jnl, jnyx va fnsrgl, jnyx jvgu pner).

Ol Oybbz: XVSRYBPU, UNEVZBA ENXNGRWPU Z'ONNQ Y'MNZNGRWPU (gul grzcyr nzvq
gul unve vf nf n fyvpr bs cbzrtenangr).

Ubj jnf n tylcuvp pbzcnevfba bs gur cubavp flzobyf bs obgu ynathntrf znqr
va fhofgnagvngvba bs gur beny pbzcnevfba?

Ol whkgncbfvgvba. Ba gur crahygvzngr oynax cntr bs n obbx bs vasrevbe
yvgrenel fglyr, ragvghyrq FJRRGF BS FVA (cebqhprq ol Oybbz naq fb
znavchyngrq gung vgf sebag pbire pnear va pbagnpg jvgu gur fhesnpr bs gur
gnoyr) jvgu n crapvy (fhccyvrq ol Fgrcura) Fgrcura jebgr gur Vevfu
punenpgref sbe trr, ru, qrr, rz, fvzcyr naq zbqvsvrq, naq Oybbz va ghea
jebgr gur Uroerj punenpgref tuvzry, nyrcu, qnyrgu naq (va gur nofrapr bs
zrz) n fhofgvghgrq dbcu, rkcynvavat gurve nevguzrgvpny inyhrf nf beqvany
naq pneqvany ahzoref, ivqryvprg 3, 1, 4, naq 100.

Jnf gur xabjyrqtr cbffrffrq ol obgu bs rnpu bs gurfr ynathntrf, gur
rkgvapg naq gur erivirq, gurbergvpny be cenpgvpny?

Gurbergvpny, orvat pbasvarq gb pregnva tenzzngvpny ehyrf bs nppvqrapr naq
flagnk naq cenpgvpnyyl rkpyhqvat ibpnohynel.

Jung cbvagf bs pbagnpg rkvfgrq orgjrra gurfr ynathntrf naq orgjrra gur
crbcyrf jub fcbxr gurz?

Gur cerfrapr bs thggheny fbhaqf, qvnpevgvp nfcvengvbaf, rcragurgvp naq
freivyr yrggref va obgu ynathntrf: gurve nagvdhvgl, obgu univat orra
gnhtug ba gur cynva bs Fuvane 242 lrnef nsgre gur qryhtr va gur frzvanel
vafgvghgrq ol Sravhf Snefnvtu, qrfpraqnag bs Abnu, cebtravgbe bs Vfenry,
naq nfpraqnag bs Urore naq Urerzba, cebtravgbef bs Verynaq: gurve
nepunrbybtvpny, trarnybtvpny, untvbtencuvpny, rkrtrgvpny, ubzvyrgvp,
gbcbabznfgvp, uvfgbevpny naq eryvtvbhf yvgrengherf pbzcevfvat gur jbexf
bs enoovf naq phyqrrf, Gbenu, Gnyzhq (Zvfpuan naq Turznen), Znffbe,
Cragngrhpu, Obbx bs gur Qha Pbj, Obbx bs Onyylzbgr, Tneynaq bs Ubjgu,
Obbx bs Xryyf: gurve qvfcrefny, crefrphgvba, fheiviny naq eriviny: gur
vfbyngvba bs gurve flantbtvpny naq rppyrfvnfgvpny evgrf va turggb (F.
Znel'f Noorl) naq znffubhfr (Nqnz naq Rir'f gnirea): gur cebfpevcgvba bs
gurve angvbany pbfghzrf va crany ynjf naq wrjvfu qerff npgf: gur
erfgbengvba va Punanu Qnivq bs Mvba naq gur cbffvovyvgl bs Vevfu
cbyvgvpny nhgbabzl be qribyhgvba.

Jung nagurz qvq Oybbz punag cnegvnyyl va nagvpvcngvba bs gung zhygvcyr,
rguavpnyyl veerqhpvoyr pbafhzzngvba?


    XBYBQ ONYRWJNJ CAVZNU
    ARSRFPU, WRUHQV, UBZVWNU.


Jul jnf gur punag neerfgrq ng gur pbapyhfvba bs guvf svefg qvfgvpu?

Va pbafrdhrapr bs qrsrpgvir zarzbgrpuavp.


Ubj qvq gur punagre pbzcrafngr sbe guvf qrsvpvrapl?

Ol n crevcuenfgvp irefvba bs gur trareny grkg.


Va jung pbzzba fghql qvq gurve zhghny ersyrpgvbaf zretr?

Gur vapernfvat fvzcyvsvpngvba genprnoyr sebz gur Rtlcgvna rcvtencuvp
uvrebtylcuf gb gur Terrx naq Ebzna nycunorgf naq gur nagvpvcngvba bs
zbqrea fgrabtencul naq gryrtencuvp pbqr va gur pharvsbez vafpevcgvbaf
(Frzvgvp) naq gur ivethyne dhvadhrpbfgngr btunz jevgvat (Prygvp). Qvq gur
thrfg pbzcyl jvgu uvf ubfg'f erdhrfg?

Qbhoyl, ol nccraqvat uvf fvtangher va Vevfu naq Ebzna punenpgref.


Jung jnf Fgrcura'f nhqvgvir frafngvba?

Ur urneq va n cebsbhaq napvrag znyr hasnzvyvne zrybql gur npphzhyngvba bs
gur cnfg.


Jung jnf Oybbz'f ivfhny frafngvba?

Ur fnj va n dhvpx lbhat znyr snzvyvne sbez gur cerqrfgvangvba bs n shgher.


Jung jrer Fgrcura'f naq Oybbz'f dhnfvfvzhygnarbhf ibyvgvbany
dhnfvfrafngvbaf bs pbaprnyrq vqragvgvrf?

Ivfhnyyl, Fgrcura'f: Gur genqvgvbany svther bs ulcbfgnfvf, qrcvpgrq ol
Wbunaarf Qnznfprahf, Yraghyhf Ebznahf naq Rcvcunavhf Zbanpuhf nf
yrhpbqrezvp, frfdhvcrqnyvna jvgu jvarqnex unve. Nhqvgviryl, Oybbz'f: Gur
genqvgvbany npprag bs gur rpfgnfl bs pngnfgebcur.

Jung shgher pnerref unq orra cbffvoyr sbe Oybbz va gur cnfg naq jvgu jung
rkrzcynef?

Va gur puhepu, Ebzna, Natyvpna be Abapbasbezvfg: rkrzcynef, gur irel
erireraq Wbua Pbazrr F. W., gur erireraq G. Fnyzba, Q. Q., cebibfg bs
Gevavgl pbyyrtr, Qe Nyrknaqre W. Qbjvr. Ng gur one, Ratyvfu be Vevfu:
rkrzcynef, Frlzbhe Ohfur, X. P., Ehshf Vfnnpf, X. P. Ba gur fgntr zbqrea
be Funxrfcrnerna: rkrzcynef, Puneyrf Jlaqunz, uvtu pbzrqvna Bfzbaq Grneyr
(qvrq 1901), rkcbarag bs Funxrfcrner.

Qvq gur ubfg rapbhentr uvf thrfg gb punag va n zbqhyngrq ibvpr n fgenatr
yrtraq ba na nyyvrq gurzr?

Ernffhevatyl, gurve cynpr, jurer abar pbhyq urne gurz gnyx, orvat
frpyhqrq, ernffherq, gur qrpbpgrq orirentrf, nyybjvat sbe fhofbyvq
erfvqhny frqvzrag bs n zrpunavpny zvkgher, jngre cyhf fhtne cyhf pernz
cyhf pbpbn, univat orra pbafhzrq.

Erpvgr gur svefg (znwbe) cneg bs guvf punagrq yrtraq.


    YVGGYR UNEEL UHTURF NAQ UVF FPUBBYSRYYBJF NYY
    JRAG BHG SBE GB CYNL ONYY.
    NAQ GUR IREL SVEFG ONYY YVGGYR UNEEL UHTURF CYNLRQ
    UR QEBIR VG B'RE GUR WRJ'F TNEQRA JNYY.
    NAQ GUR IREL FRPBAQ ONYY YVGGYR UNEEL UHTURF CYNLRQ
    UR OEBXR GUR WRJ'F JVAQBJF NYY.


Ubj qvq gur fba bs Ehqbycu erprvir guvf svefg cneg?

Jvgu hazvkrq srryvat. Fzvyvat, n wrj ur urneq jvgu cyrnfher naq fnj gur
haoebxra xvgpura jvaqbj.

Erpvgr gur frpbaq cneg (zvabe) bs gur yrtraq.


    GURA BHG GURER PNZR GUR WRJ'F QNHTUGRE
    NAQ FUR NYY QERFFRQ VA TERRA.
    "PBZR ONPX, PBZR ONPX, LBH CERGGL YVGGYR OBL,
    NAQ CYNL LBHE ONYY NTNVA."

    "V PNA'G PBZR ONPX NAQ V JBA'G PBZR ONPX
    JVGUBHG ZL FPUBBYSRYYBJF NYY.
    SBE VS ZL ZNFGRE UR QVQ URNE
    UR'Q ZNXR VG N FBEEL ONYY."

    FUR GBBX UVZ OL GUR YVYLJUVGR UNAQ
    NAQ YRQ UVZ NYBAT GUR UNYY
    HAGVY FUR YRQ UVZ GB N EBBZ
    JURER ABAR PBHYQ URNE UVZ PNYY.

    FUR GBBX N CRAXAVSR BHG BS URE CBPXRG
    NAQ PHG BSS  UVF YVGGYR URNQ.
    NAQ ABJ UR'YY CYNL UVF ONYY AB ZBER
    SBE UR YVRF NZBAT GUR QRNQ.


Ubj qvq gur sngure bs Zvyyvprag erprvir guvf frpbaq cneg?

Jvgu zvkrq srryvatf. Hafzvyvat, ur urneq naq fnj jvgu jbaqre n wrj'f
qnhtugre, nyy qerffrq va terra.

Pbaqrafr Fgrcura'f pbzzragnel.

Bar bs nyy, gur yrnfg bs nyy, vf gur ivpgvz cerqrfgvarq. Bapr ol
vanqiregrapr gjvpr ol qrfvta ur punyyratrf uvf qrfgval. Vg pbzrf jura ur
vf nonaqbarq naq punyyratrf uvz eryhpgnag naq, nf na nccnevgvba bs ubcr
naq lbhgu, ubyqf uvz haerfvfgvat. Vg yrnqf uvz gb n fgenatr unovgngvba,
gb n frperg vasvqry ncnegzrag, naq gurer, vzcynpnoyr, vzzbyngrf uvz,
pbafragvat.

Jul jnf gur ubfg (ivpgvz cerqrfgvarq) fnq?

Ur jvfurq gung n gnyr bs n qrrq fubhyq or gbyq bs n qrrq abg ol uvz
fubhyq ol uvz abg or gbyq.

Jul jnf gur ubfg (eryhpgnag, haerfvfgvat) fgvyy?

Va nppbeqnapr jvgu gur ynj bs gur pbafreingvba bs raretl.

Jul jnf gur ubfg (frperg vasvqry) fvyrag?

Ur jrvturq gur cbffvoyr rivqraprf sbe naq ntnvafg evghny zheqre: gur
vapvgngvbaf bs gur uvrenepul, gur fhcrefgvgvba bs gur cbchynpr, gur
cebcntngvba bs ehzbhe va pbagvahrq senpgvba bs irevqvpvgl, gur rail bs
bchyrapr, gur vasyhrapr bs ergnyvngvba, gur fcbenqvp ernccrnenapr bs
ngnivfgvp qryvadhrapl, gur zvgvtngvat pvephzfgnaprf bs snangvpvfz,
ulcabgvp fhttrfgvba naq fbzanzohyvfz.

Sebz juvpu (vs nal) bs gurfr zragny be culfvpny qvfbeqref jnf ur abg
gbgnyyl vzzhar?

Sebz ulcabgvp fhttrfgvba: bapr, jnxvat, ur unq abg erpbtavfrq uvf
fyrrcvat ncnegzrag: zber guna bapr, jnxvat, ur unq orra sbe na vaqrsvavgr
gvzr vapncnoyr bs zbivat be hggrevat fbhaqf. Sebz fbzanzohyvfz: bapr,
fyrrcvat, uvf obql unq evfra, pebhpurq naq penjyrq va gur qverpgvba bs n
urngyrff sver naq, univat nggnvarq vgf qrfgvangvba, gurer, pheyrq,
haurngrq, va avtug nggver unq ynva, fyrrcvat.

Unq guvf ynggre be nal pbtangr curabzraba qrpynerq vgfrys va nal zrzore
bs uvf snzvyl?

Gjvpr, va Ubyyrf fgerrg naq va Bagnevb greenpr, uvf qnhtugre Zvyyvprag
(Zvyyl) ng gur ntrf bs 6 naq 8 lrnef unq hggrerq va fyrrc na rkpynzngvba
bs greebe naq unq ercyvrq gb gur vagreebtngvbaf bs gjb svtherf va avtug
nggver jvgu n inpnag zhgr rkcerffvba.

Jung bgure vasnagvyr zrzbevrf unq ur bs ure?

15 Whar 1889. N dhrehybhf arjobea srznyr vasnag pelvat gb pnhfr naq
yrffra pbatrfgvba. N puvyq eranzrq Cnqarl Fbpxf fur fubbx jvgu fubpxf ure
zbarlobk: pbhagrq uvf guerr serr zbarlcraal ohggbaf, bar, gybb, gyrr: n
qbyy, n obl, n fnvybe fur pnfg njnl: oybaq, obea bs gjb qnex, fur unq
oybaq naprfgel, erzbgr, n ivbyngvba, Uree Unhcgznaa Unvanh, Nhfgevna
nezl, cebkvzngr, n unyyhpvangvba, yvrhgranag Zhyirl, Oevgvfu anil.

Jung raqrzvp punenpgrevfgvpf jrer cerfrag?

Pbairefryl gur anfny naq sebagny sbezngvba jnf qrevirq va n qverpg yvar
bs yvarntr juvpu, gubhtu vagreehcgrq, jbhyq pbagvahr ng qvfgnag vagreinyf
gb zber qvfgnag vagreinyf gb vgf zbfg qvfgnag vagreinyf.

Jung zrzbevrf unq ur bs ure nqbyrfprapr?

Fur eryrtngrq ure ubbc naq fxvccvatebcr gb n erprff. Ba gur qhxr'f ynja,
ragerngrq ol na Ratyvfu ivfvgbe, fur qrpyvarq gb crezvg uvz gb znxr naq
gnxr njnl ure cubgbtencuvp vzntr (bowrpgvba abg fgngrq). Ba gur Fbhgu
Pvephyne ebnq va gur pbzcnal bs Ryfn Cbggre, sbyybjrq ol na vaqvivqhny bs
fvavfgre nfcrpg, fur jrag unys jnl qbja Fgnzre fgerrg naq ghearq noehcgyl
onpx (ernfba bs punatr abg fgngrq). Ba gur ivtvy bs gur 15gu naavirefnel
bs ure ovegu fur jebgr n yrggre sebz Zhyyvatne, pbhagl Jrfgzrngu, znxvat
n oevrs nyyhfvba gb n ybpny fghqrag (snphygl naq lrne abg fgngrq).

Qvq gung svefg qvivfvba, cbegraqvat n frpbaq qvivfvba, nssyvpg uvz?

Yrff guna ur unq vzntvarq, zber guna ur unq ubcrq.

Jung frpbaq qrcnegher jnf pbagrzcbenarbhfyl creprvirq ol uvz fvzvyneyl,
vs qvssreragyl?

N grzcbenel qrcnegher bs uvf png.

Jul fvzvyneyl, jul qvssreragyl?

Fvzvyneyl, orpnhfr npghngrq ol n frperg checbfr gur dhrfg bs n arj znyr

(Zhyyvatne fghqrag) be bs n urnyvat ureo (inyrevna). Qvssreragyl, orpnhfr
bs qvssrerag cbffvoyr ergheaf gb gur vaunovgnagf be gb gur unovgngvba.

Va bgure erfcrpgf jrer gurve qvssreraprf fvzvyne?

Va cnffvivgl, va rpbabzl, va gur vafgvapg bs genqvgvba, va
harkcrpgrqarff.

Nf?

Vanfzhpu nf yrnavat fur fhfgnvarq ure oybaq unve sbe uvz gb evooba vg sbe
ure (ps arpxnepuvat png). Zberbire, ba gur serr fhesnpr bs gur ynxr va
Fgrcura'f terra nzvq vairegrq ersyrpgvbaf bs gerrf ure hapbzzragrq fcvg,
qrfpevovat pbapragevp pvepyrf bs jngreevatf, vaqvpngrq ol gur pbafgnapl
bs vgf creznarapr gur ybphf bs n fbzabyrag cebfgengr svfu (ps
zbhfrjngpuvat png).

Ntnva, va beqre gb erzrzore gur qngr, pbzongnagf, vffhr naq pbafrdhraprf
bs n snzbhf zvyvgnel ratntrzrag fur chyyrq n cynvg bs ure unve (ps
rnejnfuvat png). Shegurezber, fvyyl Zvyyl, fur qernzrq bs univat unq na
hafcbxra haerzrzorerq pbairefngvba jvgu n ubefr jubfr anzr unq orra
Wbfrcu gb jubz (juvpu) fur unq bssrerq n ghzoyreshy bs yrzbanqr juvpu vg
(ur) unq nccrnerq gb unir npprcgrq (ps urneguqernzvat png). Urapr, va
cnffvivgl, va rpbabzl, va gur vafgvapg bs genqvgvba, va harkcrpgrqarff,
gurve qvssreraprf jrer fvzvyne.

Va jung jnl unq ur hgvyvfrq tvsgf 1) na bjy, 2) n pybpx, tvira nf
zngevzbavny nhthevrf, gb vagrerfg naq gb vafgehpg ure?

Nf bowrpg yrffbaf gb rkcynva: 1) gur angher naq unovgf bs bivcnebhf
navznyf, gur cbffvovyvgl bs nrevny syvtug, pregnva noabeznyvgvrf bs
ivfvba, gur frphyne cebprff bs vzonyfnzngvba: 2) gur cevapvcyr bs gur
craqhyhz, rkrzcyvsvrq va obo, jurrytrne naq erthyngbe, gur genafyngvba va
grezf bs uhzna be fbpvny erthyngvba bs gur inevbhf cbfvgvbaf bs pybpxjvfr
zbirnoyr vaqvpngbef ba na hazbivat qvny, gur rknpgvghqr bs gur erpheerapr
cre ubhe bs na vafgnag va rnpu ubhe jura gur ybatre naq gur fubegre
vaqvpngbe jrer ng gur fnzr natyr bs vapyvangvba, IVQRYVPRG, 5 5/11
zvahgrf cnfg rnpu ubhe cre ubhe va nevguzrgvpny cebterffvba.

Va jung znaaref qvq fur erpvcebpngr?

Fur erzrzorerq: ba gur 27gu naavirefnel bs uvf ovegu fur cerfragrq gb uvz
n oernxsnfg zbhfgnpurphc bs vzvgngvba Pebja Qreol cbeprynva jner. Fur
cebivqrq: ng dhnegre qnl be gurernobhgf vs be jura chepunfrf unq orra
znqr ol uvz abg sbe ure fur fubjrq urefrys nggragvir gb uvf arprffvgvrf,
nagvpvcngvat uvf qrfverf. Fur nqzverq: n angheny curabzraba univat orra
rkcynvarq ol uvz gb ure fur rkcerffrq gur vzzrqvngr qrfver gb cbffrff
jvgubhg tenqhny npdhvfvgvba n senpgvba bs uvf fpvrapr, gur zbvrgl, gur
dhnegre, n gubhfnaqgu cneg.

Jung cebcbfny qvq Oybbz, qvnzohyvfg, sngure bs Zvyyl, fbzanzohyvfg, znxr
gb Fgrcura, abpgnzohyvfg?

Gb cnff va ercbfr gur ubhef vagreiravat orgjrra Guhefqnl (cebcre) naq
Sevqnl (abezny) ba na rkgrzcbevfrq phovpyr va gur ncnegzrag vzzrqvngryl
nobir gur xvgpura naq vzzrqvngryl nqwnprag gb gur fyrrcvat ncnegzrag bs
uvf ubfg naq ubfgrff.

Jung inevbhf nqinagntrf jbhyq be zvtug unir erfhygrq sebz n cebybatngvba
bs fhpu na rkgrzcbevfngvba?

Sbe gur thrfg: frphevgl bs qbzvpvyr naq frpyhfvba bs fghql. Sbe gur ubfg:
erwhirangvba bs vagryyvtrapr, ivpnevbhf fngvfsnpgvba. Sbe gur ubfgrff:
qvfvagrtengvba bs bofrffvba, npdhvfvgvba bs pbeerpg Vgnyvna
cebahapvngvba.

Jul zvtug gurfr frireny cebivfvbany pbagvatrapvrf orgjrra n thrfg naq n
ubfgrff abg arprffnevyl cerpyhqr be or cerpyhqrq ol n creznarag
riraghnyvgl bs erpbapvyvngbel havba orgjrra n fpubbysryybj naq n wrj'f
qnhtugre?

Orpnhfr gur jnl gb qnhtugre yrq guebhtu zbgure, gur jnl gb zbgure guebhtu
qnhtugre.

Gb jung vapbafrdhrag cbylflyynovp dhrfgvba bs uvf ubfg qvq gur thrfg
erghea n zbabflyynovp artngvir nafjre?

Vs ur unq xabja gur yngr Zef Rzvyl Fvavpb, nppvqragnyyl xvyyrq ng Flqarl
Cnenqr envyjnl fgngvba, 14 Bpgbore 1903.

Jung vapubngr pbebyynel fgngrzrag jnf pbafrdhragyl fhccerffrq ol gur
ubfg?

N fgngrzrag rkcynangbel bs uvf nofrapr ba gur bppnfvba bs gur vagrezrag
bs Zef Znel Qrqnyhf (obea Tbhyqvat), 26 Whar 1903, ivtvy bs gur
naavirefnel bs gur qrprnfr bs Ehqbycu Oybbz (obea Ivent).

Jnf gur cebcbfny bs nflyhz npprcgrq?

Cebzcgyl, varkcyvpnoyl, jvgu nzvpnovyvgl, tengrshyyl vg jnf qrpyvarq.
Jung rkpunatr bs zbarl gbbx cynpr orgjrra ubfg naq thrfg?

Gur sbezre erghearq gb gur ynggre, jvgubhg vagrerfg, n fhz bs zbarl
(1-7-0), bar cbhaq frira fuvyyvatf fgreyvat, nqinaprq ol gur ynggre gb
gur sbezre.

Jung pbhagrecebcbfnyf jrer nygreangryl nqinaprq, npprcgrq, zbqvsvrq,
qrpyvarq, erfgngrq va bgure grezf, ernpprcgrq, engvsvrq, erpbasvezrq?

Gb vanhthengr n cerneenatrq pbhefr bs Vgnyvna vafgehpgvba, cynpr gur
erfvqrapr bs gur vafgehpgrq. Gb vanhthengr n pbhefr bs ibpny vafgehpgvba,
cynpr gur erfvqrapr bs gur vafgehpgerff. Gb vanhthengr n frevrf bs fgngvp
frzvfgngvp naq crevcngrgvp vagryyrpghny qvnybthrf, cynprf gur erfvqrapr
bs obgu fcrnxref (vs obgu fcrnxref jrer erfvqrag va gur fnzr cynpr), gur
Fuvc ubgry naq gnirea, 6 Ybjre Noorl fgerrg (J. naq R. Pbaarel,
cebcevrgbef), gur Angvbany Yvoenel bs Verynaq, 10 Xvyqner fgerrg, gur
Angvbany Zngreavgl Ubfcvgny, 29, 30 naq 31 Ubyyrf fgerrg, n choyvp
tneqra, gur ivpvavgl bs n cynpr bs jbefuvc, n pbawhapgvba bs gjb be zber
choyvp gubebhtusnerf, gur cbvag bs ovfrpgvba bs n evtug yvar qenja
orgjrra gurve erfvqraprf (vs obgu fcrnxref jrer erfvqrag va qvssrerag
cynprf).

Jung eraqrerq ceboyrzngvp sbe Oybbz gur ernyvfngvba bs gurfr zhghnyyl
frysrkpyhqvat cebcbfvgvbaf?

Gur veercnenovyvgl bs gur cnfg: bapr ng n cresbeznapr bs Nyoreg Uratyre'f
pvephf va gur Ebghaqn, Ehgynaq fdhner, Qhoyva, na vaghvgvir cnegvpbybherq
pybja va dhrfg bs cngreavgl unq crargengrq sebz gur evat gb n cynpr va
gur nhqvgbevhz jurer Oybbz, fbyvgnel, jnf frngrq naq unq choyvpyl
qrpynerq gb na rkuvynengrq nhqvrapr gung ur (Oybbz) jnf uvf (gur pybja'f)
cncn. Gur vzcerivqvovyvgl bs gur shgher: bapr va gur fhzzre bs 1898 ur
(Oybbz) unq znexrq n sybeva (2/-) jvgu guerr abgpurf ba gur zvyyrq rqtr
naq graqrerq vg z cnlzrag bs na nppbhag qhr gb naq erprvirq ol W. naq G.
Qnil, snzvyl tebpref, 1 Puneyrzbag Znyy, Tenaq Pnany, sbe pvephyngvba ba
gur jngref bs pvivp svanapr, sbe cbffvoyr, pvephvgbhf be qverpg, erghea.

Jnf gur pybja Oybbz'f fba?

Ab.

Unq Oybbz'f pbva erghearq?

Arire.

Jul jbhyq n erpheerag sehfgengvba gur zber qrcerff uvz?

Orpnhfr ng gur pevgvpny gheavatcbvag bs uhzna rkvfgrapr ur qrfverq gb
nzraq znal fbpvny pbaqvgvbaf, gur cebqhpg bs vardhnyvgl naq ninevpr naq
vagreangvbany navzbfvgl.

Ur oryvrirq gura gung uhzna yvsr jnf vasvavgryl cresrpgvoyr, ryvzvangvat
gurfr pbaqvgvbaf?

Gurer erznvarq gur trarevp pbaqvgvbaf vzcbfrq ol angheny, nf qvfgvapg
sebz uhzna ynj, nf vagrteny cnegf bs gur uhzna jubyr: gur arprffvgl bs
qrfgehpgvba gb cebpher nyvzragnel fhfgranapr: gur cnvashy punenpgre bs
gur hygvzngr shapgvbaf bs frcnengr rkvfgrapr, gur ntbavrf bs ovegu naq
qrngu: gur zbabgbabhf zrafgehngvba bs fvzvna naq (cnegvphyneyl) uhzna
srznyrf rkgraqvat sebz gur ntr bs choregl gb gur zrabcnhfr: varivgnoyr
nppvqragf ng frn, va zvarf naq snpgbevrf: pregnva irel cnvashy znynqvrf
naq gurve erfhygnag fhetvpny bcrengvbaf, vaangr yhanpl naq pbatravgny
pevzvanyvgl, qrpvzngvat rcvqrzvpf: pngnfgebcuvp pngnpylfzf juvpu znxr
greebe gur onfvf bs uhzna zragnyvgl: frvfzvp hcurninyf gur rcvpragerf bs
juvpu ner ybpngrq va qrafryl cbchyngrq ertvbaf: gur snpg bs ivgny tebjgu,
guebhtu pbaihyfvbaf bs zrgnzbecubfvf, sebz vasnapl guebhtu znghevgl gb
qrpnl.

Jul qvq ur qrfvfg sebz fcrphyngvba?

Orpnhfr vg jnf n gnfx sbe n fhcrevbe vagryyvtrapr gb fhofgvghgr bgure
zber npprcgnoyr curabzran va gur cynpr bs gur yrff npprcgnoyr curabzran
gb or erzbirq.

Qvq Fgrcura cnegvpvcngr va uvf qrwrpgvba?

Ur nssvezrq uvf fvtavsvpnapr nf n pbafpvbhf engvbany navzny cebprrqvat
flyybtvfgvpnyyl sebz gur xabja gb gur haxabja naq n pbafpvbhf engvbany
erntrag orgjrra n zvpeb naq n znpebpbfz varyhpgnoyl pbafgehpgrq hcba gur
vapregvghqr bs gur ibvq.

Jnf guvf nssvezngvba ncceruraqrq ol Oybbz?

Abg ireonyyl. Fhofgnagvnyyl.

Jung pbzsbegrq uvf zvfnccerurafvba?

Gung nf n pbzcrgrag xrlyrff pvgvmra ur unq cebprrqrq raretrgvpnyyl sebz
gur haxabja gb gur xabja guebhtu gur vapregvghqr bs gur ibvq.

Va jung beqre bs cerprqrapr, jvgu jung nggraqnag prerzbal jnf gur rkbqhf
sebz gur ubhfr bs obaqntr gb gur jvyqrearff bs vaunovgngvba rssrpgrq?


Yvtugrq Pnaqyr va Fgvpx obear ol
OYBBZ
Qvnpbany Ung ba Nfucynag obear ol
FGRCURA:


Jvgu jung vagbangvba frpergb bs jung pbzzrzbengvir cfnyz?

Gur 113gu, ZBQHF CRERTEVAHF: VA RKVGH VFENRY QR RTLCGB: QBZHF WNPBO QR
CBCHYB ONEONEB.


Jung qvq rnpu qb ng gur qbbe bs rterff?

Oybbz frg gur pnaqyrfgvpx ba gur sybbe. Fgrcura chg gur ung ba uvf urnq.


Sbe jung perngher jnf gur qbbe bs rterff n qbbe bs vaterff?

Sbe n png.


Jung fcrpgnpyr pbasebagrq gurz jura gurl, svefg gur ubfg, gura gur thrfg,
rzretrq fvyragyl, qbhoyl qnex, sebz bofphevgl ol n cnffntr sebz gur erer
bs gur ubhfr vagb gur crahzoen bs gur tneqra?

Gur urniragerr bs fgnef uhat jvgu uhzvq avtugoyhr sehvg.

Jvgu jung zrqvgngvbaf qvq Oybbz nppbzcnal uvf qrzbafgengvba gb uvf
pbzcnavba bs inevbhf pbafgryyngvbaf?

Zrqvgngvbaf bs ribyhgvba vapernfvatyl infgre: bs gur zbba vaivfvoyr va
vapvcvrag yhangvba, nccebnpuvat crevtrr: bs gur vasvavgr ynggvtvabhf
fpvagvyyngvat hapbaqrafrq zvyxl jnl, qvfpreavoyr ol qnlyvtug ol na
bofreire cynprq ng gur ybjre raq bs n plyvaqevpny iregvpny funsg 5000 sg
qrrc fhax sebz gur fhesnpr gbjneqf gur prager bs gur rnegu: bs Fvevhf
(nycun va Pnavf Znvbe) 10 yvtuglrnef (57,000,000,000,000 zvyrf) qvfgnag
naq va ibyhzr 900 gvzrf gur qvzrafvba bs bhe cynarg: bs Nepghehf: bs gur
cerprffvba bs rdhvabkrf: bs Bevba jvgu oryg naq frkghcyr fha gurgn naq
arohyn va juvpu 100 bs bhe fbyne flfgrzf pbhyq or pbagnvarq: bs zbevohaq
naq bs anfprag arj fgnef fhpu nf Abin va 1901: bs bhe flfgrz cyhatvat
gbjneqf gur pbafgryyngvba bs Urephyrf: bs gur cnenyynk be cnenyynpgvp
qevsg bs fbpnyyrq svkrq fgnef, va ernyvgl rirezbivat jnaqreref sebz
vzzrnfhenoyl erzbgr rbaf gb vasvavgryl erzbgr shgherf va pbzcnevfba jvgu
juvpu gur lrnef, guerrfpber naq gra, bs nyybggrq uhzna yvsr sbezrq n
cneragurfvf bs vasvavgrfvzny oerivgl.

Jrer gurer boirefr zrqvgngvbaf bs vaibyhgvba vapernfvatyl yrff infg?

Bs gur rbaf bs trbybtvpny crevbqf erpbeqrq va gur fgengvsvpngvbaf bs gur
rnegu: bs gur zlevnq zvahgr ragbzbybtvpny betnavp rkvfgraprf pbaprnyrq va
pnivgvrf bs gur rnegu, orarngu erzbinoyr fgbarf, va uvirf naq zbhaqf, bs
zvpeborf, trezf, onpgrevn, onpvyyv, fcrezngbmbn: bs gur vapnyphynoyr
gevyyvbaf bs ovyyvbaf bs zvyyvbaf bs vzcreprcgvoyr zbyrphyrf pbagnvarq ol
pburfvba bs zbyrphyne nssvavgl va n fvatyr cvaurnq: bs gur havirefr bs
uhzna frehz pbafgryyngrq jvgu erq naq juvgr obqvrf, gurzfryirf havirefrf
bs ibvq fcnpr pbafgryyngrq jvgu bgure obqvrf, rnpu, va pbagvahvgl, vgf
havirefr bs qvivfvoyr pbzcbarag obqvrf bs juvpu rnpu jnf ntnva qvivfvoyr
va qvivfvbaf bs erqvivfvoyr pbzcbarag obqvrf, qvivqraqf naq qvivfbef rire
qvzvavfuvat jvgubhg npghny qvivfvba gvyy, vs gur cebterff jrer pneevrq
sne rabhtu, abhtug abjurer jnf arire ernpurq.

Jul qvq ur abg rynobengr gurfr pnyphyngvbaf gb n zber cerpvfr erfhyg?

Orpnhfr fbzr lrnef cerivbhfyl va 1886 jura bpphcvrq jvgu gur ceboyrz bs
gur dhnqengher bs gur pvepyr ur unq yrnearq bs .gur rkvfgrapr bs n ahzore
pbzchgrq gb n eryngvir qrterr bs npphenpl gb or bs fhpu zntavghqr naq bs
fb znal cynprf, r.t., gur 9gu cbjre bs gur 9gu cbjre bs 9, gung, gur
erfhyg univat orra bognvarq, 33 pybfryl cevagrq ibyhzrf bs 1000 cntrf
rnpu bs vaahzrenoyr dhverf naq ernzf bs Vaqvn cncre jbhyq unir gb or
erdhvfvgvbarq va beqre gb pbagnva gur pbzcyrgr gnyr bs vgf cevagrq
vagrtref bs havgf, graf, uhaqerqf, gubhfnaqf, graf bs gubhfnaqf, uhaqerqf
bs gubhfnaqf, zvyyvbaf, graf bs zvyyvbaf, uhaqerqf bs zvyyvbaf, ovyyvbaf,
gur ahpyrhf bs gur arohyn bs rirel qvtvg bs rirel frevrf pbagnvavat
fhppvapgyl gur cbgragvnyvgl bs orvat envfrq gb gur hgzbfg xvargvp
rynobengvba bs nal cbjre bs nal bs vgf cbjref.

Qvq ur svaq gur ceboyrzf bs gur vaunovgnovyvgl bs gur cynargf naq gurve
fngryyvgrf ol n enpr, tvira va fcrpvrf, naq bs gur cbffvoyr fbpvny naq
zbeny erqrzcgvba bs fnvq enpr ol n erqrrzre, rnfvre bs fbyhgvba?

Bs n qvssrerag beqre bs qvssvphygl. Pbafpvbhf gung gur uhzna betnavfz,
abeznyyl pncnoyr bs fhfgnvavat na ngzbfcurevp cerffher bs 19 gbaf, jura
ryringrq gb n pbafvqrenoyr nygvghqr va gur greerfgevny ngzbfcurer
fhssrerq jvgu nevguzrgvpny cebterffvba bs vagrafvgl, nppbeqvat nf gur
yvar bs qrznepngvba orgjrra gebcbfcurer naq fgengbfcurer jnf nccebkvzngrq
sebz anfny urzbeeuntr, vzcrqrq erfcvengvba naq iregvtb, jura cebcbfvat
guvf ceboyrz sbe fbyhgvba, ur unq pbawrpgherq nf n jbexvat ulcbgurfvf
juvpu pbhyq abg or cebirq vzcbffvoyr gung n zber nqncgnoyr naq
qvssreragyl nangbzvpnyyl pbafgehpgrq enpr bs orvatf zvtug fhofvfg
bgurejvfr haqre Znegvna, Zrephevny, Irareny, Wbivna, Fngheavna, Arcghavna
be Henavna fhssvpvrag naq rdhvinyrag pbaqvgvbaf, gubhtu na ncbtrna
uhznavgl bs orvatf perngrq va inelvat sbezf jvgu svavgr qvssreraprf
erfhygvat fvzvyne gb gur jubyr naq gb bar nabgure jbhyq cebonoyl gurer nf
urer erznva vanygrenoyl naq vanyvranoyl nggnpurq gb inavgvrf, gb inavgvrf
bs inavgvrf naq gb nyy gung vf inavgl.

Naq gur ceboyrz bs cbffvoyr erqrzcgvba?

Gur zvabe jnf cebirq ol gur znwbe.

Juvpu inevbhf srngherf bs gur pbafgryyngvbaf jrer va ghea pbafvqrerq?

Gur inevbhf pbybhef fvtavsvpnag bs inevbhf qrterrf bs ivgnyvgl (juvgr,
lryybj, pevzfba, irezvyvba, pvaanone): gurve qrterrf bs oevyyvnapl: gurve
zntavghqrf erirnyrq hc gb naq vapyhqvat gur 7gu: gurve cbfvgvbaf: gur
jnttbare'f fgne: Jnyfvatunz jnl: gur punevbg bs Qnivq: gur naahyne
pvapgherf bs Fnghea: gur pbaqrafngvba bs fcveny arohynr vagb fhaf: gur
vagreqrcraqrag tlengvbaf bs qbhoyr fhaf: gur vaqrcraqrag flapuebabhf
qvfpbirevrf bs Tnyvyrb, Fvzba Znevhf, Cvnmmv, Yr Ireevre, Urefpury,
Tnyyr: gur flfgrzngvfngvbaf nggrzcgrq ol Obqr naq Xrcyre bs phorf bs
qvfgnaprf naq fdhnerf bs gvzrf bs eribyhgvba: gur nyzbfg vasvavgr
pbzcerffvovyvgl bs uvefhgr pbzrgf naq gurve infg ryyvcgvpny rterffvir naq
erragenag beovgf sebz crevuryvba gb ncuryvba: gur fvqrerny bevtva bs
zrgrbevp fgbarf: gur Yvolna sybbqf ba Znef nobhg gur crevbq bs gur ovegu
bs gur lbhatre nfgebfpbcvfg: gur naahny erpheerapr bs zrgrbevp fubjref
nobhg gur crevbq bs gur srnfg bs F. Ynjerapr (znegle, yb Nhthfg): gur
zbaguyl erpheerapr xabja nf gur arj zbba jvgu gur byq zbba va ure nezf:
gur cbfvgrq vasyhrapr bs pryrfgvny ba uhzna obqvrf: gur nccrnenapr bs n
fgne (1fg zntavghqr) bs rkprrqvat oevyyvnapl qbzvangvat ol avtug naq qnl
(n arj yhzvabhf fha trarengrq ol gur pbyyvfvba naq nznytnzngvba va
vapnaqrfprapr bs gjb abayhzvabhf rkfhaf) nobhg gur crevbq bs gur ovegu bs
Jvyyvnz Funxrfcrner bire qrygn va gur erphzorag arirefrggvat
pbafgryyngvba bs Pnffvbcrvn naq bs n fgne (2aq zntavghqr) bs fvzvyne
bevtva ohg bs yrffre oevyyvnapl juvpu unq nccrnerq va naq qvfnccrnerq
sebz gur pbafgryyngvba bs gur Pbeban Frcgragevbanyvf nobhg gur crevbq bs
gur ovegu bs Yrbcbyq Oybbz naq bs bgure fgnef bs (cerfhznoyl) fvzvyne
bevtva juvpu unq (rssrpgviryl be cerfhznoyl) nccrnerq va naq qvfnccrnerq
sebz gur pbafgryyngvba bs Naqebzrqn nobhg gur crevbq bs gur ovegu bs
Fgrcura Qrqnyhf, naq va naq sebz gur pbafgryyngvba bs Nhevtn fbzr lrnef
nsgre gur ovegu naq qrngu bs Ehqbycu Oybbz, whavbe, naq va naq sebz bgure
pbafgryyngvbaf fbzr lrnef orsber be nsgre gur ovegu be qrngu bs bgure
crefbaf: gur nggraqnag curabzran bs rpyvcfrf, fbyne naq yhane, sebz
vzzrefvba gb rzrefvba, nongrzrag bs jvaq, genafvg bs funqbj, gnpvgheavgl
bs jvatrq perngherf, rzretrapr bs abpgheany be perchfphyne navznyf,
crefvfgrapr bs vasreany yvtug, bofphevgl bs greerfgevny jngref, cnyybe bs
uhzna orvatf.

Uvf (Oybbz'f) ybtvpny pbapyhfvba, univat jrvturq gur znggre naq nyybjvat
sbe cbffvoyr reebe?

Gung vg jnf abg n urniragerr, abg n urniratebg, abg n urniraornfg, abg n
urnirazna. Gung vg jnf n Hgbcvn, gurer orvat ab xabja zrgubq sebz gur
xabja gb gur haxabja: na vasvavgl eraqrenoyr rdhnyyl svavgr ol gur
fhccbfvgvbhf nccbfvgvba bs bar be zber obqvrf rdhnyyl bs gur fnzr naq bs
qvssrerag zntavghqrf: n zbovyvgl bs vyyhfbel sbezf vzzbovyvfrq va fcnpr,
erzbovyvfrq va nve: n cnfg juvpu cbffvoyl unq prnfrq gb rkvfg nf n
cerfrag orsber vgf cebonoyr fcrpgngbef unq ragrerq npghny cerfrag
rkvfgrapr.

Jnf ur zber pbaivaprq bs gur rfgurgvp inyhr bs gur fcrpgnpyr?

Vaqhovgnoyl va pbafrdhrapr bs gur ervgrengrq rknzcyrf bs cbrgf va gur
qryvevhz bs gur seraml bs nggnpuzrag be va gur nonfrzrag bs erwrpgvba
vaibxvat neqrag flzcngurgvp pbafgryyngvbaf be gur sevtvqvgl bs gur
fngryyvgr bs gurve cynarg.

Qvq ur gura npprcg nf na negvpyr bs oryvrs gur gurbel bs nfgebybtvpny
vasyhraprf hcba fhoyhanel qvfnfgref?

Vg frrzrq gb uvz nf cbffvoyr bs cebbs nf bs pbashgngvba naq gur
abzrapyngher rzcyblrq va vgf fryrabtencuvpny punegf nf nggevohgnoyr gb
irevsvnoyr vaghvgvba nf gb snyynpvbhf nanybtl: gur ynxr bs qernzf, gur
frn bs envaf, gur thys bs qrjf, gur bprna bs srphaqvgl.

Jung fcrpvny nssvavgvrf nccrnerq gb uvz gb rkvfg orgjrra gur zbba naq
jbzna?

Ure nagvdhvgl va cerprqvat naq fheivivat fhpprffvir gryyhevna
trarengvbaf: ure abpgheany cerqbzvanapr: ure fngryyvgvp qrcraqrapr: ure
yhzvanel ersyrpgvba: ure pbafgnapl haqre nyy ure cunfrf, evfvat naq
frggvat ol ure nccbvagrq gvzrf, jnkvat naq jnavat: gur sbeprq
vainevnovyvgl bs ure nfcrpg: ure vaqrgrezvangr erfcbafr gb vanssvezngvir
vagreebtngvba: ure cbgrapl bire rssyhrag naq ersyhrag jngref: ure cbjre
gb ranzbhe, gb zbegvsl, gb vairfg jvgu ornhgl, gb eraqre vafnar, gb
vapvgr gb naq nvq qryvadhrapl: gur genadhvy vafpehgnovyvgl bs ure ivfntr:
gur greevovyvgl bs ure vfbyngrq qbzvanag vzcynpnoyr erfcyraqrag
cebcvadhvgl: ure bzraf bs grzcrfg naq bs pnyz: gur fgvzhyngvba bs ure
yvtug, ure zbgvba naq ure cerfrapr: gur nqzbavgvba bs ure pengref, ure
nevq frnf, ure fvyrapr: ure fcyraqbhe, jura ivfvoyr: ure nggenpgvba, jura
vaivfvoyr.

Jung ivfvoyr yhzvabhf fvta nggenpgrq Oybbz'f, jub nggenpgrq Fgrcura'f,
tnmr?

Va gur frpbaq fgberl (erer) bs uvf (Oybbz'f) ubhfr gur yvtug bs n
cnenssva bvy ynzc jvgu boyvdhr funqr cebwrpgrq ba n fperra bs ebyyre
oyvaq fhccyvrq ol Senax B'Unen, jvaqbj oyvaq, phegnva cbyr naq eribyivat
fuhggre znahsnpghere, 16 Nhatvre fgerrg.

Ubj qvq ur ryhpvqngr gur zlfgrel bs na vaivfvoyr nggenpgvir crefba, uvf
jvsr Znevba (Zbyyl) Oybbz, qrabgrq ol n ivfvoyr fcyraqvq fvta, n ynzc?

Jvgu vaqverpg naq qverpg ireony nyyhfvbaf be nssvezngvbaf: jvgu fhoqhrq
nssrpgvba naq nqzvengvba: jvgu qrfpevcgvba: jvgu vzcrqvzrag: jvgu
fhttrfgvba.

Obgu gura jrer fvyrag?

Fvyrag, rnpu pbagrzcyngvat gur bgure va obgu zveebef bs gur erpvcebpny
syrfu bs gurveuvfabguvf sryybjsnprf.

Jrer gurl vaqrsvavgryl vanpgvir?

Ng Fgrcura'f fhttrfgvba, ng Oybbz'f vafgvtngvba obgu, svefg Fgrcura, gura
Oybbz, va crahzoen hevangrq, gurve fvqrf pbagvthbhf, gurve betnaf bs
zvpghevgvba erpvcebpnyyl eraqrerq vaivfvoyr ol znahny pvephzcbfvgvba,
gurve tnmrf, svefg Oybbz'f, gura Fgrcura'f, ryringrq gb gur cebwrpgrq
yhzvabhf naq frzvyhzvabhf funqbj.

Fvzvyneyl?

Gur genwrpgbevrf bs gurve, svefg frdhrag, gura fvzhygnarbhf, hevangvbaf
jrer qvffvzvyne: Oybbz'f ybatre, yrff veehrag, va gur vapbzcyrgr sbez bs
gur ovshepngrq crahygvzngr nycunorgvpny yrggre, jub va uvf hygvzngr lrne
ng Uvtu Fpubby (1880) unq orra pncnoyr bs nggnvavat gur cbvag bs terngrfg
nygvghqr ntnvafg gur jubyr pbapheerag fgeratgu bs gur vafgvghgvba, 210
fpubynef: Fgrcura'f uvture, zber fvovynag, jub va gur hygvzngr ubhef bs
gur cerivbhf qnl unq nhtzragrq ol qvhergvp pbafhzcgvba na vafvfgrag
irfvpny cerffher.

Jung qvssrerag ceboyrzf cerfragrq gurzfryirf gb rnpu pbapreavat gur
vaivfvoyr nhqvoyr pbyyngreny betna bs gur bgure?

Gb Oybbz: gur ceboyrzf bs veevgnovyvgl, ghzrfprapr, evtvqvgl, ernpgvivgl,
qvzrafvba, fnavgnevarff, cvybfvgl.

Gb Fgrcura: gur ceboyrz bs gur fnpreqbgny vagrtevgl bs Wrfhf pvephzpvfrq
(V Wnahnel, ubyvqnl bs boyvtngvba gb urne znff naq nofgnva sebz
haarprffnel freivyr jbex) naq gur ceboyrz nf gb jurgure gur qvivar
cerchpr, gur pneany oevqny evat bs gur ubyl Ebzna pngubyvp ncbfgbyvp
puhepu, pbafreirq va Pnypngn, jrer qrfreivat bs fvzcyr ulcreqhyl be bs
gur sbhegu qrterr bs yngevn nppbeqrq gb gur nofpvffvba bs fhpu qvivar
rkperfpraprf nf unve naq gbranvyf.

Jung pryrfgvny fvta jnf ol obgu fvzhygnarbhfyl bofreirq?

N fgne cerpvcvgngrq jvgu terng nccnerag irybpvgl npebff gur sveznzrag
sebz Irtn va gur Yler nobir gur mravgu orlbaq gur fgnetebhc bs gur Gerff
bs Oreravpr gbjneqf gur mbqvnpny fvta bs Yrb.

Ubj qvq gur pragevcrgny erznvare nssbeq rterff gb gur pragevshtny
qrcnegre?

Ol vafregvat gur oneery bs na neehtvangrq znyr xrl va gur ubyr bs na
hafgnoyr srznyr ybpx, bognvavat n chepunfr ba gur obj bs gur xrl naq
gheavat vgf jneqf sebz evtug gb yrsg, jvguqenjvat n obyg sebz vgf fgncyr,
chyyvat vajneq fcnfzbqvpnyyl na bofbyrfprag hauvatrq qbbe naq erirnyvat
na ncregher sbe serr rterff naq serr vaterff.

Ubj qvq gurl gnxr yrnir, bar bs gur bgure, va frcnengvba?

Fgnaqvat crecraqvphyne ng gur fnzr qbbe naq ba qvssrerag fvqrf bs vgf
onfr, gur yvarf bs gurve inyrqvpgbel nezf, zrrgvat ng nal cbvag naq
sbezvat nal natyr yrff guna gur fhz bs gjb evtug natyrf.

Jung fbhaq nppbzcnavrq gur havba bs gurve gnatrag, gur qvfhavba bs gurve
(erfcrpgviryl) pragevshtny naq pragevcrgny unaqf?

Gur fbhaq bs gur crny bs gur ubhe bs gur avtug ol gur puvzr bs gur oryyf
va gur puhepu bs Fnvag Trbetr.

Jung rpubrf bs gung fbhaq jrer ol obgu naq rnpu urneq?

Ol Fgrcura:


    YVYVNGN EHGVYNAGVHZ. GHEZN PVEPHZQRG.
    VHOVYNAGVHZ GR IVETVAHZ. PUBEHF RKPVCVNG.


Ol Oybbz:


    URVTUB, URVTUB,
    URVTUB, URVTUB.


Jurer jrer gur frireny zrzoref bs gur pbzcnal juvpu jvgu Oybbz gung qnl
ng gur ovqqvat bs gung crny unq geniryyrq sebz Fnaqlzbhag va gur fbhgu gb
Tynfariva va gur abegu?

Znegva Phaavatunz (va orq), Wnpx Cbjre (va orq), Fvzba Qrqnyhf (va orq),
Arq Ynzoreg (va orq), Gbz Xreana (va orq), Wbr Ularf (va orq), Wbua Urael
Zragba (va orq), Oreaneq Pbeevtna (va orq), Cngfl Qvtanz (va orq), Cnqql
Qvtanz (va gur tenir).

Nybar, jung qvq Oybbz urne?

Gur qbhoyr erireorengvba bs ergerngvat srrg ba gur urniraobea rnegu, gur
qbhoyr ivoengvba bs n wrj'f unec va gur erfbanag ynar.

Nybar, jung qvq Oybbz srry?

Gur pbyq bs vagrefgryyne fcnpr, gubhfnaqf bs qrterrf orybj serrmvat cbvag
be gur nofbyhgr mreb bs Snueraurvg, Pragvtenqr be Ernhzhe: gur vapvcvrag
vagvzngvbaf bs cebkvzngr qnja.

Bs jung qvq oryypuvzr naq unaqgbhpu naq sbbgfgrc naq ybarpuvyy erzvaq
uvz?

Bs pbzcnavbaf abj va inevbhf znaaref va qvssrerag cynprf qrshapg: Crepl
Ncwbua (xvyyrq va npgvba, Zbqqre Evire), Cuvyvc Tvyyvtna (cuguvfvf,
Wreivf Fgerrg ubfcvgny), Znggurj S. Xnar (nppvqragny qebjavat, Qhoyva
Onl), Cuvyvc Zbvfry (clrzvn, Urlgrfohel fgerrg), Zvpunry Uneg (cuguvfvf,
Zngre Zvfrevpbeqvnr ubfcvgny), Cngevpx Qvtanz (ncbcyrkl, Fnaqlzbhag).

Jung cebfcrpg bs jung curabzran vapyvarq uvz gb erznva?

Gur qvfcnevgvba bs guerr svany fgnef, gur qvsshfvba bs qnloernx, gur
nccnevgvba bs n arj fbyne qvfx.

Unq ur rire orra n fcrpgngbe bs gubfr curabzran?

Bapr, va 1887, nsgre n cebgenpgrq cresbeznapr bs punenqrf va gur ubhfr bs
Yhxr Qblyr, Xvzzntr, ur unq njnvgrq jvgu cngvrapr gur nccnevgvba bs gur
qvheany curabzraba, frngrq ba n jnyy, uvf tnmr ghearq va gur qverpgvba bs
Zvmenpu, gur rnfg.

Ur erzrzorerq gur vavgvny cnencurabzran?

Zber npgvir nve, n znghgvany qvfgnag pbpx, rppyrfvnfgvpny pybpxf ng
inevbhf cbvagf, nivar zhfvp, gur vfbyngrq gernq bs na rneyl jnlsnere, gur
ivfvoyr qvsshfvba bs gur yvtug bs na vaivfvoyr yhzvabhf obql, gur svefg
tbyqra yvzo bs gur erfhetrag fha creprcgvoyr ybj ba gur ubevmba.

Qvq ur erznva?

Jvgu qrrc vafcvengvba ur erghearq, ergenirefvat gur tneqra, erragrevat
gur cnffntr, erpybfvat gur qbbe. Jvgu oevrs fhfcvengvba ur ernffhzrq gur
pnaqyr, ernfpraqrq gur fgnvef, ernccebnpurq gur qbbe bs gur sebag ebbz,
unyysybbe, naq erragrerq.

Jung fhqqrayl neerfgrq uvf vaterff?

Gur evtug grzcbeny ybor bs gur ubyybj fcurer bs uvf penavhz pnzr vagb
pbagnpg jvgu n fbyvq gvzore natyr jurer, na vasvavgrfvzny ohg frafvoyr
senpgvba bs n frpbaq yngre, n cnvashy frafngvba jnf ybpngrq va
pbafrdhrapr bs nagrprqrag frafngvbaf genafzvggrq naq ertvfgrerq.

Qrfpevor gur nygrengvbaf rssrpgrq va gur qvfcbfvgvba bs gur negvpyrf bs
sheavgher.

N fbsn hcubyfgrerq va cehar cyhfu unq orra genafybpngrq sebz bccbfvgr gur
qbbe gb gur vatyrfvqr arne gur pbzcnpgyl sheyrq Havba Wnpx (na nygrengvba
juvpu ur unq serdhragyl vagraqrq gb rkrphgr): gur oyhr naq juvgr purpxre
vaynvq znwbyvpngbccrq gnoyr unq orra cynprq bccbfvgr gur qbbe va gur
cynpr inpngrq ol gur cehar cyhfu fbsn: gur jnyahg fvqrobneq (n cebwrpgvat
natyr bs juvpu unq zbzragnevyl neerfgrq uvf vaterff) unq orra zbirq sebz
vgf cbfvgvba orfvqr gur qbbe gb n zber nqinagntrbhf ohg zber crevybhf
cbfvgvba va sebag bs gur qbbe: gjb punvef unq orra zbirq sebz evtug naq
yrsg bs gur vatyrfvqr gb gur cbfvgvba bevtvanyyl bpphcvrq ol gur oyhr naq
juvgr purpxre vaynvq znwbyvpngbccrq gnoyr.

Qrfpevor gurz.

Bar: n fdhng fghssrq rnflpunve, jvgu fgbhg nezf rkgraqrq naq onpx fynagrq
gb gur erer, juvpu, ercryyrq va erpbvy, unq gura hcghearq na veerthyne
sevatr bs n erpgnathyne eht naq abj qvfcynlrq ba vgf nzcyl hcubyfgrerq
frng n pragenyvfrq qvsshfvat naq qvzvavfuvat qvfpbybhengvba. Gur bgure: n
fyraqre fcynlsbbg punve bs tybffl pnar pheirf, cynprq qverpgyl bccbfvgr
gur sbezre, vgf senzr sebz gbc gb frng naq sebz frng gb onfr orvat
ineavfurq qnex oebja, vgf frng orvat n oevtug pvepyr bs juvgr cynvgrq
ehfu.

Jung fvtavsvpnaprf nggnpurq gb gurfr gjb punvef?

Fvtavsvpnaprf bs fvzvyvghqr, bs cbfgher, bs flzobyvfz, bs pvephzfgnagvny
rivqrapr, bs grfgvzbavny fhcreznarapr.

Jung bpphcvrq gur cbfvgvba bevtvanyyl bpphcvrq ol gur fvqrobneq?

N iregvpny cvnab (Pnqol) jvgu rkcbfrq xrlobneq, vgf pybfrq pbssva
fhccbegvat n cnve bs ybat lryybj ynqvrf' tybirf naq na rzrenyq nfugenl
pbagnvavat sbhe pbafhzrq zngpurf, n cnegyl pbafhzrq pvtnerggr naq gjb
qvfpbybherq raqf bs pvtnerggrf, vgf zhfvperfg fhccbegvat gur zhfvp va gur
xrl bs T angheny sbe ibvpr naq cvnab bs YBIR'F BYQ FJRRG FBAT (jbeqf ol
T. Pyvsgba Ovatunz, pbzcbfrq ol W. Y. Zbyybl, fhat ol Znqnz Nagbvarggr
Fgreyvat) bcra ng gur ynfg cntr jvgu gur svany vaqvpngvbaf NQ YVOVGHZ,
SBEGR, crqny, NAVZNGB, fhfgnvarq crqny, EVGVENAQB, pybfr.

Jvgu jung frafngvbaf qvq Oybbz pbagrzcyngr va ebgngvba gurfr bowrpgf?

Jvgu fgenva, ryringvat n pnaqyrfgvpx: jvgu cnva, srryvat ba uvf evtug
grzcyr n pbaghfrq ghzrfprapr: jvgu nggragvba, sbphffvat uvf tnmr ba n
ynetr qhyy cnffvir naq n fyraqre oevtug npgvir: jvgu fbyvpvgngvba,
oraqvat naq qbjagheavat gur hcghearq ehtsevatr: jvgu nzhfrzrag,
erzrzorevat Qe Znynpuv Zhyyvtna'f fpurzr bs pbybhe pbagnvavat gur
tenqngvba bs terra: jvgu cyrnfher, ercrngvat gur jbeqf naq nagrprqrag npg
naq creprvivat guebhtu inevbhf punaaryf bs vagreany frafvovyvgl gur
pbafrdhrag naq pbapbzvgnag grcvq cyrnfnag qvsshfvba bs tenqhny
qvfpbybhengvba.

Uvf arkg cebprrqvat?

Sebz na bcra obk ba gur znwbyvpngbccrq gnoyr ur rkgenpgrq n oynpx
qvzvahgvir pbar, bar vapu va urvtug, cynprq vg ba vgf pvephyne onfr ba n
fznyy gva cyngr, cynprq uvf pnaqyrfgvpx ba gur evtug pbeare bs gur
znagrycvrpr, cebqhprq sebz uvf jnvfgpbng n sbyqrq cntr bs cebfcrpghf
(vyyhfgengrq) ragvgyrq Ntraqngu Argnvz, hasbyqrq gur fnzr, rknzvarq vg
fhcresvpvnyyl, ebyyrq vg vagb n guva plyvaqre, vtavgrq vg va gur
pnaqyrsynzr, nccyvrq vg jura vtavgrq gb gur ncrk bs gur pbar gvyy gur
ynggre ernpurq gur fgntr bs ehgvynapr, cynprq gur plyvaqre va gur onfva
bs gur pnaqyrfgvpx qvfcbfvat vgf hapbafhzrq cneg va fhpu n znaare nf gb
snpvyvgngr gbgny pbzohfgvba.

Jung sbyybjrq guvf bcrengvba?

Gur gehapngrq pbavpny pengre fhzzvg bs gur qvzvahgvir ibypnab rzvggrq n
iregvpny naq frecragvar shzr erqbyrag bs nebzngvp bevragny vaprafr.

Jung ubzbgurgvp bowrpgf, bgure guna gur pnaqyrfgvpx, fgbbq ba gur
znagrycvrpr?

N gvzrcvrpr bs fgevngrq Pbaarznen zneoyr, fgbccrq ng gur ubhe bs 4.46
n.z. ba gur 21 Znepu 1896, zngevzbavny tvsg bs Znggurj Qvyyba: n qjnes
gerr bs tynpvny neoberfprapr haqre n genafcnerag oryyfunqr, zngevzbavny
tvsg bs Yhxr naq Pnebyvar Qblyr: na rzonyzrq bjy, zngevzbavny tvsg bs
Nyqrezna Wbua Ubbcre.

Jung vagrepunatrf bs ybbxf gbbx cynpr orgjrra gurfr guerr bowrpgf naq
Oybbz?

Va gur zveebe bs gur tvygobeqrerq cvretynff gur haqrpbengrq onpx bs gur
qjnes gerr ertneqrq gur hcevtug onpx bs gur rzonyzrq bjy. Orsber gur
zveebe gur zngevzbavny tvsg bs Nyqrezna Wbua Ubbcre jvgu n pyrne
zrynapubyl jvfr oevtug zbgvbayrff pbzcnffvbangr tnmr ertneqrq Oybbz juvyr
Oybbz jvgu bofpher genadhvy cebsbhaq zbgvbayrff pbzcnffvbangrq tnmr
ertneqrq gur zngevzbavny tvsg bs Yhxr naq Pnebyvar Qblyr.

Jung pbzcbfvgr nflzzrgevpny vzntr va gur zveebe gura nggenpgrq uvf
nggragvba?

Gur vzntr bs n fbyvgnel (vcfberyngvir) zhgnoyr (nyvberyngvir) zna.

Jul fbyvgnel (vcfberyngvir)?


    OEBGUREF NAQ FVFGREF UNQ UR ABAR.
    LRG GUNG ZNA'F SNGURE JNF UVF TENAQSNGURE'F FBA.


Jul zhgnoyr (nyvberyngvir)?

Sebz vasnapl gb znghevgl ur unq erfrzoyrq uvf zngreany cebperngevk. Sebz
znghevgl gb fravyvgl ur jbhyq vapernfvatyl erfrzoyr uvf cngreany
cebperngbe.

Jung svany ivfhny vzcerffvba jnf pbzzhavpngrq gb uvz ol gur zveebe?

Gur bcgvpny ersyrpgvba bs frireny vairegrq ibyhzrf vzcebcreyl neenatrq
naq abg va gur beqre bs gurve pbzzba yrggref jvgu fpvagvyyngvat gvgyrf ba
gur gjb obbxfuryirf bccbfvgr.


Pngnybthr gurfr obbxf.

GUBZ'F QHOYVA CBFG BSSVPR QVERPGBEL, 1886.
Qravf Syberapr Z'Pnegul'f CBRGVPNY JBEXF (pbccre orrpuyrns obbxznex
  ng c. 5).
Funxrfcrner'f JBEXF (qnex pevzfba zbebppb, tbyqgbbyrq).
GUR HFRSHY ERNQL ERPXBARE (oebja pybgu).
GUR FRPERG UVFGBEL BS GUR PBHEG BS PUNEYRF VV (erq pybgu, gbbyrq
  ovaqvat).
GUR PUVYQ'F THVQR (oyhr pybgu).
Gur Ornhgvrf bs Xvyynearl (jenccref).
JURA JR JRER OBLF ol Jvyyvnz B'Oevra Z. C. (terra pybgu, fyvtugyl snqrq,
  rairybcr obbxznex ng c. 217).
GUBHTUGF SEBZ FCVABMN (znebba yrngure).
GUR FGBEL BS GUR URNIRAF ol Fve Eboreg Onyy (oyhr pybgu).
Ryyvf'f GUERR GEVCF GB ZNQNTNFPNE (oebja pybgu, gvgyr boyvgrengrq).
GUR FGNEX-ZHAEB YRGGREF ol N. Pbana Qblyr, cebcregl bs gur Pvgl bs
  Qhoyva Choyvp Yvoenel, 106 Pncry fgerrg, yrag 21 Znl (Juvgfha Rir)
  1904, qhr 4 Whar 1904, 13 qnlf bireqhr (oynpx pybgu ovaqvat, ornevat
  juvgr yrggreahzore gvpxrg).
IBLNTRF VA PUVAN ol "Ivngbe" (erpbirerq jvgu oebja cncre, erq vax gvgyr).
CUVYBFBCUL BS GUR GNYZHQ (frja cnzcuyrg).
Ybpxuneg'f YVSR BS ANCBYRBA (pbire jnagvat, znetvany naabgngvbaf,
  zvavzvfvat ivpgbevrf, nttenaqvfvat qrsrngf bs gur cebgntbavfg).
FBYY HAQ UNORA ol Thfgni Serlgnt (oynpx obneqf, Tbguvp punenpgref,
  pvtnerggr pbhcba obbxznex ng c. 24).
Ubmvre'f UVFGBEL BS GUR EHFFB-GHEXVFU JNE (oebja pybgu, n ibyhzrf, jvgu
  thzzrq ynory, Tneevfba Yvoenel, Tbireabe'f Cnenqr, Tvoenygne, ba irefb
  bs pbire).
YNHERAPR OYBBZSVRYQ VA VERYNAQ ol Jvyyvnz Nyyvatunz (frpbaq rqvgvba,
  terra pybgu, tvyg gersbvy qrfvta, cerivbhf bjare'f anzr ba erpgb bs
  sylyrns renfrq).
N UNAQOBBX BS NFGEBABZL (pbire, oebja yrngure, qrgnpurq, F cyngrf,
  nagvdhr yrggrecerff ybat cevzre, nhgube'f sbbgabgrf abacnervy, znetvany
  pyhrf oerivre, pncgvbaf fznyy cvpn).
GUR UVQQRA YVSR BS PUEVFG (oynpx obneqf).
VA GUR GENPX BS GUR FHA (lryybj pybgu, gvgyrcntr zvffvat, erpheerag gvgyr
  vagrfgngvba).
CULFVPNY FGERATGU NAQ UBJ GB BOGNVA VG ol Rhtra Fnaqbj (erq pybgu).
FUBEG OHG LRG CYNVA RYRZRAGF BS TRBZRGEL jevggra va Serapu ol S. Vtang.
  Cneqvrf naq eraqrerq vagb Ratyvfu ol Wbua Uneevf Q. Q. Ybaqba,
  cevagrq sbe E. Xancybpx ng gur Ovsubc'f Urnq, ZQPPKV, jvgu qrqvpngbel
  rcvsgyr gb uvf jbegul sevraq Puneyrf Pbk, rsdhver, Zrzore bs
  Cneyvnzrag sbe gur ohetu bs Fbhgujnex naq univat vax pnyyvtencurq
  fgngrzrag ba gur sylyrns pregvslvat gung gur obbx jnf gur cebcregl bs
  Zvpunry Tnyynture, qngrq guvf 10gu qnl bs Znl 1822 naq erdhrsgvat gur
  cresba jub fubhyq svaq vg, vs gur obbx fubhyq or ybsg be tb nsgenl,
  gb ersgber vg gb Zvpunry Tnyynture, pnecragre, Qhsrel Tngr,
  Raavspbegul, pbhagl Jvpxybj, gur svarsg cynpr va gur jbeyq.


Jung ersyrpgvbaf bpphcvrq uvf zvaq qhevat gur cebprff bs erirefvba bs gur
vairegrq ibyhzrf?

Gur arprffvgl bs beqre, n cynpr sbe rirelguvat naq rirelguvat va vgf
cynpr: gur qrsvpvrag nccerpvngvba bs yvgrengher cbffrffrq ol srznyrf: gur
vapbatehvgl bs na nccyr vapharngrq va n ghzoyre naq bs na hzoeryyn
vapyvarq va n pybfrfgbby: gur vafrphevgl bs uvqvat nal frperg qbphzrag
oruvaq, orarngu be orgjrra gur cntrf bs n obbx.

Juvpu ibyhzr jnf gur ynetrfg va ohyx?

Ubmvre'f UVFGBEL BS GUR EHFFB-GHEXVFU JNE.

Jung nzbat bgure qngn qvq gur frpbaq ibyhzr bs gur jbex va dhrfgvba
pbagnva?

Gur anzr bs n qrpvfvir onggyr (sbetbggra), serdhragyl erzrzorerq ol n
qrpvfvir bssvpre, znwbe Oevna Pbbcre Gjrrql (erzrzorerq).

Jul, svefgyl naq frpbaqyl, qvq ur abg pbafhyg gur jbex va dhrfgvba?

Svefgyl, va beqre gb rkrepvfr zarzbgrpuavp: frpbaqyl, orpnhfr nsgre na
vagreiny bs nzarfvn, jura, frngrq ng gur prageny gnoyr, nobhg gb pbafhyg
gur jbex va dhrfgvba, ur erzrzorerq ol zarzbgrpuavp gur anzr bs gur
zvyvgnel ratntrzrag, Cyrian.

Jung pnhfrq uvz pbafbyngvba va uvf fvggvat cbfgher?

Gur pnaqbhe, ahqvgl, cbfr, genadhvyvgl, lbhgu, tenpr, frk, pbhafry bs n
fgnghr rerpg va gur prager bs gur gnoyr, na vzntr bs Anepvffhf chepunfrq
ol nhpgvba sebz C. N. Jera, 9 Onpurybe'f Jnyx.

Jung pnhfrq uvz veevgngvba va uvf fvggvat cbfgher? Vauvovgbel cerffher bs
pbyyne (fvmr 17) naq jnvfgpbng (5 ohggbaf), gjb negvpyrf bs pybguvat
fhcresyhbhf va gur pbfghzr bs zngher znyrf naq varynfgvp gb nygrengvbaf
bs znff ol rkcnafvba.

Ubj jnf gur veevgngvba nyynlrq?

Ur erzbirq uvf pbyyne, jvgu pbagnvarq oynpx arpxgvr naq pbyyncfvoyr fghq,
sebz uvf arpx gb n cbfvgvba ba gur yrsg bs gur gnoyr. Ur haohggbarq
fhpprffviryl va erirefrq qverpgvba jnvfgpbng, gebhfref, fuveg naq irfg
nybat gur zrqvny yvar bs veerthyne vapevfcngrq oynpx unvef rkgraqvat va
gevnathyne pbairetrapr sebz gur cryivp onfva bire gur pvephzsrerapr bs
gur noqbzra naq hzovyvphyne sbffvpyr nybat gur zrqvny yvar bs abqrf gb
gur vagrefrpgvba bs gur fvkgu crpgbeny iregroenr, gurapr cebqhprq obgu
jnlf ng evtug natyrf naq grezvangvat va pvepyrf qrfpevorq nobhg gjb
rdhvqvfgnag cbvagf, evtug naq yrsg, ba gur fhzzvgf bs gur znzznel
cebzvaraprf. Ur haoenprq fhpprffviryl rnpu bs fvk zvahf bar oenprq
gebhfre ohggbaf, neenatrq va cnvef, bs juvpu bar vapbzcyrgr.

Jung vaibyhagnel npgvbaf sbyybjrq?

Ur pbzcerffrq orgjrra 2 svatref gur syrfu pvephzwnprag gb n pvpngevpr va
gur yrsg vasenpbfgny ertvba orybj gur qvncuentz erfhygvat sebz n fgvat
vasyvpgrq 2 jrrxf naq 3 qnlf cerivbhfyl (23 Znl 1904) ol n orr. Ur
fpengpurq vzcerpvfryl jvgu uvf evtug unaq, gubhtu vafrafvoyr bs
cehevgvba, inevbhf cbvagf naq fhesnprf bs uvf cnegyl rkcbfrq, jubyyl
noyhgrq fxva. Ur vafregrq uvf yrsg unaq vagb gur yrsg ybjre cbpxrg bs uvf
jnvfgpbng naq rkgenpgrq naq ercynprq n fvyire pbva (V fuvyyvat), cynprq
gurer (cerfhznoyl) ba gur bppnfvba (17 Bpgbore 1903) bs gur vagrezrag bs
Zef Rzvyl Fvavpb, Flqarl Cnenqr.

Pbzcvyr gur ohqtrg sbe 16 Whar 1904.

QROVG                                           PERQVG
                         Y--f--q                                   Y--f--q
1 Cbex xvqarl            0--0--3 Pnfu va Unaq                      0--4--9
1 Pbcl SERRZNA'F WBHEANY 0--0--1 Pbzzvffvba erpq SERRZNA'F WBHEANY 1--7--6
1 Ongu Naq Tengvsvpngvba 0--1--6 Ybna (Fgrcura Qrqnyhf)            1--7--0
Genzsner                 0--0--1
1 Va Zrzbevnz
Cngevpx Qvtanz           0--5--0
2 Onaohel pnxrf          0--0--1
1 Yhapu                  0--0--7
1 Erarjny srr sbe obbx   0--1--0
1 Cnpxrg Abgrcncre
naq Rairybcrf            0--0--2
1 Qvaare
naq Tengvsvpngvba        0--2--0
V Cbfgny Beqre
naq Fgnzc                0--2--8
Genzsner                 0--0--1
1 Cvt'f Sbbg             0--0--4
1 Furrc'f Gebggre        0--0--3
1 Pnxr Sel'f
Cynva Pubpbyngr          0--0--1
1 Fdhner Fbqn Oernq      0--0--4
1 Pbssrr naq Oha         0--0--4
Ybna (Fgrcura Qrqnyhf)
ershaqrq                 1--7--0

ONYNAPR                 0--17--5
                        2--19--3                                  2--19--3


Qvq gur cebprff bs qvirfgvgher pbagvahr?

Frafvoyr bs n oravtanag crefvfgrag npur va uvf sbbgfbyrf ur rkgraqrq uvf
sbbg gb bar fvqr naq bofreirq gur pernfrf, cebghorenaprf naq fnyvrag
cbvagf pnhfrq ol sbbg cerffher va gur pbhefr bs jnyxvat ercrngrqyl va
frireny qvssrerag qverpgvbaf, gura, vapyvarq, ur qvfabqrq gur ynprxabgf,
haubbxrq naq ybbfrarq gur ynprf, gbbx bss rnpu bs uvf gjb obbgf sbe gur
frpbaq gvzr, qrgnpurq gur cnegvnyyl zbvfgrarq evtug fbpx guebhtu gur sber
cneg bs juvpu gur anvy bs uvf terng gbr unq ntnva rssenpgrq, envfrq uvf
evtug sbbg naq, univat haubbxrq n checyr rynfgvp fbpx fhfcraqre, gbbx bss
uvf evtug fbpx, cynprq uvf hapybgurq evtug sbbg ba gur znetva bs gur frng
bs uvf punve, cvpxrq ng naq tragyl ynprengrq gur cebgehqvat cneg bs gur
terng gbranvy, envfrq gur cneg ynprengrq gb uvf abfgevyf naq vaunyrq gur
bqbhe bs gur dhvpx, gura, jvgu fngvfsnpgvba, guerj njnl gur ynprengrq
hathny sentzrag.

Jul jvgu fngvfsnpgvba?

Orpnhfr gur bqbhe vaunyrq pbeerfcbaqrq gb bgure bqbhef vaunyrq bs bgure
hathny sentzragf, cvpxrq naq ynprengrq ol Znfgre Oybbz, chcvy bs Zef
Ryyvf'f whiravyr fpubby, cngvragyl rnpu avtug va gur npg bs oevrs
trahsyrpgvba naq abpgheany cenlre naq nzovgvbhf zrqvgngvba.

Va jung hygvzngr nzovgvba unq nyy pbapheerag naq pbafrphgvir nzovgvbaf
abj pbnyrfprq?

Abg gb vaurevg ol evtug bs cevzbtravgher, tniryxvaq be obebhtu Ratyvfu,
be cbffrff va crecrghvgl na rkgrafvir qrzrfar bs n fhssvpvrag ahzore bs
nperf, ebbqf naq crepurf, fgnghgr ynaq zrnfher (inyhngvba 42 cbhaqf), bs
tenmvat gheonel fheebhaqvat n onebavny unyy jvgu tngrybqtr naq pneevntr
qevir abe, ba gur bgure unaq, n greenprubhfr be frzvqrgnpurq ivyyn,
qrfpevorq nf EHF VA HEOR be DHV FV FNAN, ohg gb chepunfr ol cevingr
gerngl va srr fvzcyr n gungpurq ohatnybjfuncrq 2 fgberl qjryyvatubhfr bs
fbhgureyl nfcrpg, fhezbhagrq ol inar naq yvtugavat pbaqhpgbe, pbaarpgrq
jvgu gur rnegu, jvgu cbepu pbirerq ol cnenfvgvp cynagf (vil be Ivetvavn
perrcre), unyyqbbe, byvir terra, jvgu fzneg pneevntr svavfu naq arng
qbbeoenffrf, fghppb sebag jvgu tvyg genprel ng rnirf naq tnoyr, evfvat,
vs cbffvoyr, hcba n tragyr rzvarapr jvgu nterrnoyr cebfcrpg sebz onypbal
jvgu fgbar cvyyne cnencrg bire habpphcvrq naq habpphclnoyr vagrewnprag
cnfgherf naq fgnaqvat va 5 be 6 nperf bs vgf bja tebhaq, ng fhpu n
qvfgnapr sebz gur arnerfg choyvp gubebhtusner nf gb eraqre vgf
ubhfryvtugf ivfvoyr ng avtug nobir naq guebhtu n dhvpxfrg ubeaornz urqtr
bs gbcvnel phggvat, fvghngr ng n tvira cbvag abg yrff guna 1 fgnghgr zvyr
sebz gur crevcurel bs gur zrgebcbyvf, jvguva n gvzr yvzvg bs abg zber
guna 15 zvahgrf sebz genz be genva yvar (r.t., Qhaqehz, fbhgu, be Fhggba,
abegu, obgu ybpnyvgvrf rdhnyyl ercbegrq ol gevny gb erfrzoyr gur
greerfgevny cbyrf va orvat snibhenoyr pyvzngrf sbe cuguvfvpny fhowrpgf),
gur cerzvfrf gb or uryq haqre srrsnez tenag, yrnfr 999 lrnef, gur
zrffhntr gb pbafvfg bs 1 qenjvatebbz jvgu onljvaqbj (2 ynaprgf),
gurezbzrgre nssvkrq, 1 fvggvatebbz, 4 orqebbzf, 2 freinagf' ebbzf, gvyrq
xvgpura jvgu pybfr enatr naq fphyyrel, ybhatr unyy svggrq jvgu yvara
jnyycerffrf, shzrq bnx frpgvbany obbxpnfr pbagnvavat gur Raplpybcnrqvn
Oevgnaavpn naq Arj Praghel Qvpgvbanel, genafirefr bofbyrgr zrqvriny naq
bevragny jrncbaf, qvaare tbat, nynonfgre ynzc, objy craqnag, ihypnavgr
nhgbzngvp gryrcubar erprvire jvgu nqwnprag qverpgbel, unaqghsgrq
Nkzvafgre pnecrg jvgu pernz tebhaq naq geryyvf obeqre, ybb gnoyr jvgu
cvyyne naq pynj yrtf, urnegu jvgu znffvir sveroenffrf naq bezbyh znagry
puebabzrgre pybpx, thnenagrrq gvzrxrrcre jvgu pngurqeny puvzr, onebzrgre
jvgu ultebtencuvp puneg, pbzsbegnoyr ybhatr frggrrf naq pbeare svgzragf,
hcubyfgrerq va ehol cyhfu jvgu tbbq fcevatvat naq fhax prager, guerr
onaare Wncnarfr fperra naq phfcvqbef (pyho fglyr, evpu jvarpbybherq
yrngure, tybff erarjnoyr jvgu n zvavzhz bs ynobhe ol hfr bs yvafrrq bvy
naq ivartne) naq clenzvqvpnyyl cevfzngvp prageny punaqryvre yhfger,
oragjbbq crepu jvgu svatregnzr cneebg (rkchetngrq ynathntr), rzobffrq
zheny cncre ng 10/- cre qbmra jvgu genafirefr fjntf bs pnezvar sybeny
qrfvta naq gbc pebja sevrmr, fgnvepnfr, guerr pbagvahbhf syvtugf ng
fhpprffvir evtug natyrf, bs ineavfurq pyrnetenvarq bnx, gernqf naq
evfref, arjry, onyhfgref naq unaqenvy, jvgu fgrccrqhc cnary qnqb, qerffrq
jvgu pnzcubengrq jnk: onguebbz, ubg naq pbyq fhccyl, erpyvavat naq
fubjre: jngre pybfrg ba zrmmnavar cebivqrq jvgu bcndhr fvatyrcnar boybat
jvaqbj, gvchc frng, oenpxrg ynzc, oenff gvrebq naq oenpr, nezerfgf,
sbbgfgbby naq negvfgvp byrbtencu ba vaare snpr bs qbbe: qvggb, cynva:
freinagf' ncnegzragf jvgu frcnengr fnavgnel naq ultvravp arprffnevrf sbe
pbbx, trareny naq orgjrraznvq (fnynel, evfvat ol ovraavny harnearq
vaperzragf bs 2 cbhaqf, jvgu pbzcerurafvir svqryvgl vafhenapr, naahny
obahf (1 cbhaq) naq ergvevat nyybjnapr (onfrq ba gur 65 flfgrz) nsgre 30
lrnef' freivpr), cnagel, ohggrel, yneqre, ersevtrengbe, bhgbssvprf, pbny
naq jbbq pryynentr jvgu jvarova (fgvyy naq fcnexyvat ivagntrf) sbe
qvfgvathvfurq thrfgf, vs ragregnvarq gb qvaare (riravat qerff), pneoba
zbabkvqr tnf fhccyl guebhtubhg.

Jung nqqvgvbany nggenpgvbaf zvtug gur tebhaqf pbagnva?

Nf nqqraqn, n graavf naq svirf pbheg, n fuehoorel, n tynff fhzzreubhfr
jvgu gebcvpny cnyzf, rdhvccrq va gur orfg obgnavpny znaare, n ebpxrel
jvgu jngrefcenl, n orruvir neenatrq ba uhznar cevapvcyrf, biny sybjreorqf
va erpgnathyne tenffcybgf frg jvgu rppragevp ryyvcfrf bs fpneyrg naq
puebzr ghyvcf, oyhr fpvyynf, pebphfrf, cbylnaguhf, fjrrg Jvyyvnz, fjrrg
crn, yvyl bs gur inyyrl (ohyof bognvanoyr sebz fve Wnzrf J. Znpxrl
(Yvzvgrq) jubyrfnyr naq ergnvy frrq naq ohyo zrepunagf naq ahefrelzra,
ntragf sbe purzvpny znaherf, 23 Fnpxivyyr fgerrg, hccre), na bepuneq,
xvgpura tneqra naq ivarel cebgrpgrq ntnvafg vyyrtny gerfcnffref ol
tynffgbccrq zheny rapybfherf, n yhzorefurq jvgu cnqybpx sbe inevbhf
vairagbevrq vzcyrzragf.

Nf?

Rrygencf, ybofgrecbgf, svfuvatebqf, ungpurg, fgrrylneq, tevaqfgbar,
pybqpehfure, fjngurgheare, pneevntrfnpx, gryrfpbcr ynqqre, 10 gbbgu enxr,
jnfuvat pybtf, unlgrqqre, ghzoyvat enxr, ovyyubbx, cnvagcbg, oehfu, ubr
naq fb ba.

Jung vzcebirzragf zvtug or fhofrdhragyl vagebqhprq?

N enoovgel naq sbjyeha, n qbirpbgr, n obgnavpny pbafreingbel, 2 unzzbpxf
(ynql'f naq tragyrzna'f), n fhaqvny funqrq naq furygrerq ol ynoheahz be
yvynp gerrf, na rkbgvpnyyl unezbavpnyyl nppbeqrq Wncnarfr gvaxyr tngroryy
nssvkrq gb yrsg yngreny tngrcbfg, n pncnpvbhf jngreohgg, n ynjazbjre jvgu
fvqr qryvirel naq tenffobk, n ynjafcevaxyre jvgu ulqenhyvp ubfr.

Jung snpvyvgvrf bs genafvg jrer qrfvenoyr?

Jura pvglobhaq serdhrag pbaarpgvba ol genva be genz sebz gurve erfcrpgvir
vagrezrqvngr fgngvba be grezvany. Jura pbhagelobhaq irybpvcrqrf, n
punvayrff serrjurry ebnqfgre plpyr jvgu fvqr onfxrgpne nggnpurq, be
qenhtug pbairlnapr, n qbaxrl jvgu jvpxre genc be fzneg cunrgba jvgu tbbq
jbexvat fbyvqhathyne pbo (ebna tryqvat, 14 u).

Jung zvtug or gur anzr bs guvf revtvoyr be rerpgrq erfvqrapr?

Oybbz Pbggntr. Fnvag Yrbcbyq'f. Sybjreivyyr.

Pbhyq Oybbz bs 7 Rppyrf fgerrg sberfrr Oybbz bs Sybjreivyyr?

Va ybbfr nyyjbby tnezragf jvgu Uneevf gjrrq pnc, cevpr 8/6, naq hfrshy
tneqra obbgf jvgu rynfgvp thffrgf naq jngrevatpna, cynagvat nyvtarq lbhat
svegerrf, flevatvat, cehavat, fgnxvat, fbjvat unlfrrq, gehaqyvat n
jrrqynqra jurryoneebj jvgubhg rkprffvir sngvthr ng fhafrg nzvq gur fprag
bs arjzbja unl, nzryvbengvat gur fbvy, zhygvcylvat jvfqbz, npuvrivat
ybatrivgl.

Jung flyynohf bs vagryyrpghny chefhvgf jnf fvzhygnarbhfyl cbffvoyr?

Fancfubg cubgbtencul, pbzcnengvir fghql bs eryvtvbaf, sbyxyber eryngvir
gb inevbhf nzngbel naq fhcrefgvgvbhf cenpgvprf, pbagrzcyngvba bs gur
pryrfgvny pbafgryyngvbaf.

Jung yvtugre erperngvbaf?

Bhgqbbe: tneqra naq svryqjbex, plpyvat ba yriry znpnqnzvfrq pnhfrjnlf
nfpragf bs zbqrengryl uvtu uvyyf, angngvba va frpyhqrq serfu jngre naq
hazbyrfgrq evire obngvat va frpher jureel be yvtug pheevpyr jvgu xrqtr
napube ba ernpurf serr sebz jrvef naq encvqf (crevbq bs rfgvingvba),
irfcregvany crenzohyngvba be rdhrfgevna pvephzcebprffvba jvgu vafcrpgvba
bs fgrevyr ynaqfpncr naq pbagenfgvatyl nterrnoyr pbggntref' sverf bs
fzbxvat crng gheirf (crevbq bs uvoreangvba). Vaqbbe: qvfphffvba va grcvq
frphevgl bs hafbyirq uvfgbevpny naq pevzvany ceboyrzf: yrpgher bs
harkchetngrq rkbgvp rebgvp znfgrecvrprf: ubhfr pnecragel jvgu gbbyobk
pbagnvavat unzzre, njy anvyf, fperjf, gvagnpxf, tvzyrg, gjrrmref,
ohyyabfr cynar naq gheafperj. Zvtug ur orpbzr n tragyrzna snezre bs svryq
cebqhpr naq yvir fgbpx?

Abg vzcbffvoyl, jvgu 1 be 2 fgevccre pbjf, 1 cvxr bs hcynaq unl naq
erdhvfvgr snezvat vzcyrzragf, r.t., na raq-gb-raq puhea, n gheavc chycre
rgp.

Jung jbhyq or uvf pvivp shapgvbaf naq fbpvny fgnghf nzbat gur pbhagl
snzvyvrf naq ynaqrq tragel?

Neenatrq fhpprffviryl va nfpraqvat cbjref bs uvrenepuvpny beqre, gung bs
tneqrare, tebhaqfzna, phygvingbe, oerrqre, naq ng gur mravgu bs uvf
pnerre, erfvqrag zntvfgengr be whfgvpr bs gur crnpr jvgu n snzvyl perfg
naq pbng bs nezf naq nccebcevngr pynffvpny zbggb (FRZCRE CNENGHF), qhyl
erpbeqrq va gur pbheg qverpgbel (Oybbz, Yrbcbyq C., Z. C., C. P., X. C.,
Y. Y. Q. (UBABEVF PNHFN), Oybbzivyyr, Qhaqehz) naq zragvbarq va pbheg naq
snfuvbanoyr vagryyvtrapr (Ze naq Zef Yrbcbyq Oybbz unir yrsg Xvatfgbja
sbe Ratynaq).

Jung pbhefr bs npgvba qvq ur bhgyvar sbe uvzfrys va fhpu pncnpvgl?

N pbhefr gung ynl orgjrra haqhr pyrzrapl naq rkprffvir evtbhe: gur
qvfcrafngvba va n urgrebtrarbhf fbpvrgl bs neovgenel pynffrf, vaprffnagyl
erneenatrq va grezf bs terngre naq yrffre fbpvny vardhnyvgl, bs haovnffrq
ubzbtrarbhf vaqvfchgnoyr whfgvpr, grzcrerq jvgu zvgvtnagf bs gur jvqrfg
cbffvoyr yngvghqr ohg rknpgnoyr gb gur hggrezbfg sneguvat jvgu
pbasvfpngvba bs rfgngr, erny naq crefbany, gb gur pebja. Yblny gb gur
uvturfg pbafgvghgrq cbjre va gur ynaq, npghngrq ol na vaangr ybir bs
erpgvghqr uvf nvzf jbhyq or gur fgevpg znvagranapr bs choyvp beqre, gur
ercerffvba bs znal nohfrf gubhtu abg bs nyy fvzhygnarbhfyl (rirel zrnfher
bs ersbez be ergerapuzrag orvat n ceryvzvanel fbyhgvba gb or pbagnvarq ol
syhkvba va gur svany fbyhgvba), gur hcubyqvat bs gur yrggre bs gur ynj
(pbzzba, fgnghgr naq ynj zrepunag) ntnvafg nyy genirefref va pbiva naq
gerfcnffref npgvat va pbageniragvba bs olynjf naq erthyngvbaf, nyy
erfhfpvgngbef (ol gerfcnff naq crggl ynepral bs xvaqyvatf) bs iraivyyr
evtugf, bofbyrgr ol qrfhrghqr, nyy bebghaq vafgvtngbef bs vagreangvbany
crefrphgvba, nyy crecrghngbef bs vagreangvbany navzbfvgvrf, nyy zravny
zbyrfgbef bs qbzrfgvp pbaivivnyvgl, nyy erpnypvgenag ivbyngbef bs
qbzrfgvp pbaahovnyvgl.

Cebir gung ur unq ybirq erpgvghqr sebz uvf rneyvrfg lbhgu.

Gb Znfgre Crepl Ncwbua ng Uvtu Fpubby va 1880 ur unq qvihytrq uvf
qvforyvrs va gur grargf bs gur Vevfu (cebgrfgnag) puhepu (gb juvpu uvf
sngure Ehqbys Ivent (yngre Ehqbycu Oybbz) unq orra pbairegrq sebz gur
Vfenryvgvp snvgu naq pbzzhavba va 1865 ol gur Fbpvrgl sbe cebzbgvat
Puevfgvnavgl nzbat gur wrjf) fhofrdhragyl nowherq ol uvz va snibhe bs
Ebzna pngubyvpvfz ng gur rcbpu bs naq jvgu n ivrj gb uvf zngevzbal va
1888. Gb Qnavry Zntenar naq Senapvf Jnqr va 1882 qhevat n whiravyr
sevraqfuvc (grezvangrq ol gur cerzngher rzvtengvba bs gur sbezre) ur unq
nqibpngrq qhevat abpgheany crenzohyngvbaf gur cbyvgvpny gurbel bs
pbybavny (r.t. Pnanqvna) rkcnafvba naq gur ribyhgvbanel gurbevrf bs
Puneyrf Qnejva, rkcbhaqrq va GUR QRFPRAG BS ZNA naq GUR BEVTVA BS
FCRPVRF. Va 1885 ur unq choyvpyl rkcerffrq uvf nqurerapr gb gur
pbyyrpgvir naq angvbany rpbabzvp cebtenzzr nqibpngrq ol Wnzrf Svagna
Ynybe, Wbua Svfure Zheenl, Wbua Zvgpury, W. S. K. B'Oevra naq bguref, gur
ntenevna cbyvpl bs Zvpunry Qnivgg, gur pbafgvghgvbany ntvgngvba bs
Puneyrf Fgrjneg Cnearyy (Z. C. sbe Pbex Pvgl), gur cebtenzzr bs crnpr,
ergerapuzrag naq ersbez bs Jvyyvnz Rjneg Tynqfgbar (Z. C. sbe Zvqybguvna,
A. O.) naq, va fhccbeg bs uvf cbyvgvpny pbaivpgvbaf, unq pyvzorq hc vagb
n frpher cbfvgvba nzvq gur enzvsvpngvbaf bs n gerr ba Abeguhzoreynaq ebnq
gb frr gur ragenapr (2 Sroehnel 1888) vagb gur pncvgny bs n qrzbafgengvir
gbepuyvtug cebprffvba bs 20,000 gbepuorneref, qvivqrq vagb 120 genqr
pbecbengvbaf, ornevat 2000 gbepurf va rfpbeg bs gur znedhrff bs Evcba naq
(ubarfg) Wbua Zbeyrl.

Ubj zhpu naq ubj qvq ur cebcbfr gb cnl sbe guvf pbhagel erfvqrapr?

Nf cre cebfcrpghf bs gur Vaqhfgevbhf Sbervta Nppyvzngvfrq Angvbanyvfrq
Sevraqyl Fgngrnvqrq Ohvyqvat Fbpvrgl (vapbecbengrq 1874), n znkvzhz bs 60
cbhaqf cre naahz, orvat 1/6 bs na nffherq vapbzr, qrevirq sebz tvygrqtrq
frphevgvrf, ercerfragvat ng 5 creprag fvzcyr vagrerfg ba pncvgny bs 1200
cbhaqf (rfgvzngr bs cevpr ng 20 lrnef' chepunfr), bs juvpu   gb or cnvq
ba npdhvfvgvba naq gur onynapr va gur sbez bs naahny erag, ivm. 800
cbhaqf cyhf 2 1/2 creprag vagrerfg ba gur fnzr, ercnlnoyr dhnegreyl va
rdhny naahny vafgnyzragf hagvy rkgvapgvba ol nzbegvfngvba bs ybna
nqinaprq sbe chepunfr jvguva n crevbq bs 20 lrnef, nzbhagvat gb na naahny
eragny bs 64 cbhaqf, urnqerag vapyhqrq, gur gvgyrqrrqf gb erznva va
cbffrffvba bs gur yraqre be yraqref jvgu n fnivat pynhfr raivfntvat
sbeprq fnyr, sberpybfher naq zhghny pbzcrafngvba va gur rirag bs
cebgenpgrq snvyher gb cnl gur grezf nffvtarq, bgurejvfr gur zrffhntr gb
orpbzr gur nofbyhgr cebcregl bs gur granag bpphcvre hcba rkcvel bs gur
crevbq bs lrnef fgvchyngrq.

Jung encvq ohg vafrpher zrnaf gb bchyrapr zvtug snpvyvgngr vzzrqvngr
chepunfr?

N cevingr jveryrff gryrtencu juvpu jbhyq genafzvg ol qbg naq qnfu flfgrz
gur erfhyg bs n angvbany rdhvar unaqvpnc (syng be fgrrcyrpunfr) bs V be
zber zvyrf naq sheybatf jba ol na bhgfvqre ng bqqf bs 50 gb 1 ng 3 ue 8 z
c.z. ng Nfpbg (Terrajvpu gvzr), gur zrffntr orvat erprvirq naq ninvynoyr
sbe orggvat checbfrf va Qhoyva ng 2.59 c.z. (Qhafvax gvzr). Gur
harkcrpgrq qvfpbirel bs na bowrpg bs terng zbargnel inyhr (cerpvbhf
fgbar, inyhnoyr nqurfvir be vzcerffrq cbfgntr fgnzcf (7 fpuvyyvat, znhir,
vzcresbengr, Unzohet, 1866: 4 crapr, ebfr, oyhr cncre, cresbengr, Terng
Oevgnva, 1855: 1 senap, fgbar, bssvpvny, ebhyrggrq, qvntbany fhepunetr,
Yhkrzohet, 1878), nagvdhr qlanfgvpny evat, havdhr eryvp) va hahfhny
ercbfvgbevrf be ol hahfhny zrnaf: sebz gur nve (qebccrq ol na rntyr va
syvtug), ol sver (nzvq gur pneobavfrq erznvaf bs na vapraqvngrq rqvsvpr),
va gur frn (nzvq sybgfnz, wrgfnz, yntna naq qreryvpg), ba rnegu (va gur
tvmmneq bs n pbzrfgvoyr sbjy). N Fcnavfu cevfbare'f qbangvba bs n qvfgnag
gernfher bs inyhnoyrf be fcrpvr be ohyyvba ybqtrq jvgu n fbyirag onaxvat
pbecbengvba ybb lrnef cerivbhfyl ng 5 creprag pbzcbhaq vagrerfg bs gur
pbyyrpgvir jbegu bs 5,000,000 cbhaqf fgt (svir zvyyvba cbhaqf fgreyvat).
N pbagenpg jvgu na vapbafvqrengr pbagenpgrr sbe gur qryvirel bs 32
pbafvtazragf bs fbzr tvira pbzzbqvgl va pbafvqrengvba bs pnfu cnlzrag ba
qryvirel cre qryvirel ng gur vavgvny engr bs 1/4q gb or vapernfrq
pbafgnagyl va gur trbzrgevpny cebterffvba bs 2 (1/4q, 1/2q, 1q, 2q, 4q,
8q, 1f 4q, 2f 8q gb 32 grezf). N cercnerq fpurzr onfrq ba n fghql bs gur
ynjf bs cebonovyvgl gb oernx gur onax ng Zbagr Pneyb. N fbyhgvba bs gur
frphyne ceboyrz bs gur dhnqengher bs gur pvepyr, tbireazrag cerzvhz
1,000,000 cbhaqf fgreyvat.

Jnf infg jrnygu npdhvenoyr guebhtu vaqhfgevny punaaryf?

Gur erpynzngvba bs qhanzf bs jnfgr neranel fbvy, cebcbfrq va gur
cebfcrpghf bs Ntraqngu Argnvz, Oyrvogerhfgenffr, Oreyva, J. 15, ol gur
phygvingvba bs benatr cynagngvbaf naq zrybasvryqf naq ernssberfgngvba.
Gur hgvyvfngvba bs jnfgr cncre, sryyf bs frjre ebqragf, uhzna rkperzrag
cbffrffvat purzvpny cebcregvrf, va ivrj bs gur infg cebqhpgvba bs gur
svefg, infg ahzore bs gur frpbaq naq vzzrafr dhnagvgl bs gur guveq, rirel
abezny uhzna orvat bs nirentr ivgnyvgl naq nccrgvgr cebqhpvat naahnyyl,
pnapryyvat olcebqhpgf bs jngre, n fhz gbgny bs 80 yof. (zvkrq navzny naq
irtrgnoyr qvrg), gb or zhygvcyvrq ol 4,386,035, gur gbgny cbchyngvba bs
Verynaq nppbeqvat gb prafhf ergheaf bs 1901.

Jrer gurer fpurzrf bs jvqre fpbcr?

N fpurzr gb or sbezhyngrq naq fhozvggrq sbe nccebiny gb gur uneobhe
pbzzvffvbaref sbe gur rkcybvgngvba bs juvgr pbny (ulqenhyvp cbjre),
bognvarq ol ulqebryrpgevp cynag ng crnx bs gvqr ng Qhoyva one be ng urnq
bs jngre ng Cbhyncubhpn be Cbjrefpbheg be pngpuzrag onfvaf bs znva
fgernzf sbe gur rpbabzvp cebqhpgvba bs 500,000 J. U. C. bs ryrpgevpvgl. N
fpurzr gb rapybfr gur cravafhyne qrygn bs gur Abegu Ohyy ng Qbyylzbhag
naq rerpg ba gur fcnpr bs gur sberynaq, hfrq sbe tbys yvaxf naq evsyr
enatrf, na nfcunygrq rfcynanqr jvgu pnfvabf, obbguf, fubbgvat tnyyrevrf,
ubgryf, obneqvatubhfrf, ernqvatebbzf, rfgnoyvfuzragf sbe zvkrq onguvat. N
fpurzr sbe gur hfr bs qbtinaf naq tbnginaf sbe gur qryvirel bs rneyl
zbeavat zvyx. N fpurzr sbe gur qrirybczrag bs Vevfu gbhevfg genssvp va
naq nebhaq Qhoyva ol zrnaf bs crgebycebcryyrq evireobngf, cylvat va gur
syhivny snvejnl orgjrra Vfynaq oevqtr naq Evatfraq, punenonapf, aneebj
tnhtr ybpny envyjnlf, naq cyrnfher fgrnzref sbe pbnfgjvfr anivtngvba
(10/- cre crefba cre qnl, thvqr (gevyvathny) vapyhqrq). N fpurzr sbe gur
ercevfgvangvba bs cnffratre naq tbbqf genssvpf bire Vevfu jngrejnlf, jura
serrq sebz jrrqorqf. N fpurzr gb pbaarpg ol genzyvar gur Pnggyr Znexrg
(Abegu Pvephyne ebnq naq Cehffvn fgerrg) jvgu gur dhnlf (Furevss fgerrg,
ybjre, naq Rnfg Jnyy), cnenyyry jvgu gur Yvax yvar envyjnl ynvq (va
pbawhapgvba jvgu gur Terng Fbhgurea naq Jrfgrea envyjnl yvar) orgjrra gur
pnggyr cnex, Yvssrl whapgvba, naq grezvahf bs Zvqynaq Terng Jrfgrea
Envyjnl 43 gb 45 Abegu Jnyy, va cebkvzvgl gb gur grezvany fgngvbaf be
Qhoyva oenapurf bs Terng Prageny Envyjnl, Zvqynaq Envyjnl bs Ratynaq,
Pvgl bs Qhoyva Fgrnz Cnpxrg Pbzcnal, Ynapnfuver naq Lbexfuver Envyjnl
Pbzcnal, Qhoyva naq Tynftbj Fgrnz Cnpxrg Pbzcnal, Tynftbj, Qhoyva naq
Ybaqbaqreel Fgrnz Cnpxrg Pbzcnal (Ynveq yvar), Oevgvfu naq Vevfu Fgrnz
Cnpxrg Pbzcnal, Qhoyva naq Zberpnzor Fgrnzref, Ybaqba naq Abegu Jrfgrea
Envyjnl Pbzcnal, Qhoyva Cbeg naq Qbpxf Obneq Ynaqvat Furqf naq genafvg
furqf bs Cnytenir, Zhecul naq Pbzcnal, fgrnzfuvc bjaref, ntragf sbe
fgrnzref sebz Zrqvgreenarna, Fcnva, Cbeghtny, Senapr, Orytvhz naq Ubyynaq
naq sbe Yvirecbby Haqrejevgref' Nffbpvngvba, gur pbfg bs npdhverq ebyyvat
fgbpx sbe navzny genafcbeg naq bs nqqvgvbany zvyrntr bcrengrq ol gur
Qhoyva Havgrq Genzjnlf Pbzcnal, yvzvgrq, gb or pbirerq ol tenmvref' srrf.

Cbfvgvat jung cebgnfvf jbhyq gur pbagenpgvba sbe fhpu frireny fpurzrf
orpbzr n angheny naq arprffnel ncbqbfvf?

Tvira n thnenagrr rdhny gb gur fhz fbhtug, gur fhccbeg, ol qrrq bs tvsg
naq genafsre ibhpuref qhevat qbabe'f yvsrgvzr be ol ordhrfg nsgre qbabe'f
cnvayrff rkgvapgvba, bs rzvarag svanapvref (Oyhz Cnfun, Ebgufpuvyq
Thttraurvz, Uvefpu, Zbagrsvber, Zbetna, Ebpxrsryyre) cbffrffvat sbegharf
va 6 svtherf, nznffrq qhevat n fhpprffshy yvsr, naq wbvavat pncvgny jvgu
bccbeghavgl gur guvat erdhverq jnf qbar.

Jung riraghnyvgl jbhyq eraqre uvz vaqrcraqrag bs fhpu jrnygu?

Gur vaqrcraqrag qvfpbirel bs n tbyqfrnz bs varkunhfgvoyr ber.

Sbe jung ernfba qvq ur zrqvgngr ba fpurzrf fb qvssvphyg bs ernyvfngvba?

Vg jnf bar bs uvf nkvbzf gung fvzvyne zrqvgngvbaf be gur nhgbzngvp
eryngvba gb uvzfrys bs n aneengvir pbapreavat uvzfrys be genadhvy
erpbyyrpgvba bs gur cnfg jura cenpgvfrq unovghnyyl orsber ergvevat sbe
gur avtug nyyrivngrq sngvthr naq cebqhprq nf n erfhyg fbhaq ercbfr naq
erabingrq ivgnyvgl.

Uvf whfgvsvpngvbaf?

Nf n culfvpvfg ur unq yrnearq gung bs gur 70 lrnef bs pbzcyrgr uhzna yvsr
ng yrnfg 2/7, ivm. 20 lrnef ner cnffrq va fyrrc. Nf n cuvybfbcure ur xarj
gung ng gur grezvangvba bs nal nyybggrq yvsr bayl na vasvavgrfvzny cneg
bs nal crefba'f qrfverf unf orra ernyvfrq. Nf n culfvbybtvfg ur oryvrirq
va gur negvsvpvny cynpngvba bs znyvtanag ntrapvrf puvrsyl bcrengvir
qhevat fbzabyrapr.

Jung qvq ur srne?

Gur pbzzvggny bs ubzvpvqr be fhvpvqr qhevat fyrrc ol na noreengvba bs gur
yvtug bs ernfba, gur vapbzzrafhenoyr pngrtbevpny vagryyvtrapr fvghngrq va
gur preroeny pbaibyhgvbaf.

Jung jrer unovghnyyl uvf svany zrqvgngvbaf?

Bs fbzr bar fbyr havdhr nqiregvfrzrag gb pnhfr cnffref gb fgbc va jbaqre,
n cbfgre abirygl, jvgu nyy rkgenarbhf nppergvbaf rkpyhqrq, erqhprq gb vgf
fvzcyrfg naq zbfg rssvpvrag grezf abg rkprrqvat gur fcna bs pnfhny ivfvba
naq pbatehbhf jvgu gur irybpvgl bs zbqrea yvsr.

Jung qvq gur svefg qenjre haybpxrq pbagnva?

N Irer Sbfgre'f unaqjevgvat pbclobbx, cebcregl bs Zvyyl (Zvyyvprag)
Oybbz, pregnva cntrf bs juvpu ober qvntenz qenjvatf, znexrq CNCYV, juvpu
fubjrq n ynetr tybohyne urnq jvgu 5 unvef rerpg, 2 rlrf va cebsvyr, gur
gehax shyy sebag jvgu 3 ynetr ohggbaf, 1 gevnathyne sbbg: 2 snqvat
cubgbtencuf bs dhrra Nyrknaqen bs Ratynaq naq bs Znhq Oenafpbzor, npgerff
naq cebsrffvbany ornhgl: n Lhyrgvqr pneq, ornevat ba vg n cvpgbevny
ercerfragngvba bs n cnenfvgvp cynag, gur yrtraq ZVMCNU, gur qngr Kznf
1892, gur anzr bs gur fraqref: sebz Ze + Zef Z. Pbzresbeq, gur irefvpyr:
ZNL GUVF LHYRGVQR OEVAT GB GURR, WBL NAQ CRNPR NAQ JRYPBZR TYRR: n ohgg
bs erq cnegyl yvdhrsvrq frnyvat jnk, bognvarq sebz gur fgberf qrcnegzrag
bs Zrffef Uryl'f, Ygq., 89, 90, naq 91 Qnzr fgerrg: n obk pbagnvavat gur
erznvaqre bs n tebff bs tvyg "W" craavof, bognvarq sebz fnzr qrcnegzrag
bs fnzr svez: na byq fnaqtynff juvpu ebyyrq pbagnvavat fnaq juvpu ebyyrq:
n frnyrq cebcurpl (arire hafrnyrq) jevggra ol Yrbcbyq Oybbz va 1886
pbapreavat gur pbafrdhraprf bs gur cnffvat vagb ynj bs Jvyyvnz Rjneg
Tynqfgbar'f Ubzr Ehyr ovyy bs 1886 (arire cnffrq vagb ynj): n onmnne
gvpxrg, ab 2004, bs F. Xriva'f Punevgl Snve, cevpr 6q, 100 cevmrf: na
vasnagvyr rcvfgyr, qngrq, fznyy rz zbaqnl, ernqvat: pncvgny crr Cncyv
pbzzn pncvgny nvgpu Ubj ner lbh abgr bs vagreebtngvba pncvgny rlr V nz
irel jryy shyy fgbc arj cnentencu fvtangher jvgu sybhevfurf pncvgny rz
Zvyyl ab fgbc: n pnzrb oebbpu, cebcregl bs Ryyra Oybbz (obea Uvttvaf),
qrprnfrq: n pnzrb fpnescva, cebcregl bs Ehqbycu Oybbz (obea Ivent),
qrprnfrq: 3 glcrjevggra yrggref, nqqerffrr, Urael Sybjre, p/b. C. B.
Jrfgynaq Ebj, nqqerffre, Znegun Pyvssbeq, p/b. C. B. Qbycuva'f Onea: gur
genafyvgrengrq anzr naq nqqerff bs gur nqqerffre bs gur 3 yrggref va
erirefrq nycunorgvp obhfgebcurqbavp chapgngrq dhnqevyvarne pelcgbtenz
(ibjryf fhccerffrq) A. VTF./JV. HH. BK/J. BXF. ZU/L. VZ: n cerff phggvat
sebz na Ratyvfu jrrxyl crevbqvpny ZBQREA FBPVRGL, fhowrpg pbecbeny
punfgvfrzrag va tveyf' fpubbyf: n cvax evooba juvpu unq srfgbbarq na
Rnfgre rtt va gur lrne 1899: gjb cnegyl hapbvyrq ehoore cerfreingvirf
jvgu erfreir cbpxrgf, chepunfrq ol cbfg sebz Obk 32, C. B., Punevat
Pebff, Ybaqba, J. P.: 1 cnpx bs 1 qbmra pernzynvq rairybcrf naq
srvagehyrq abgrcncre, jngreznexrq, abj erqhprq ol 3: fbzr nffbegrq
Nhfgevna-Uhatnevna pbvaf: 2 pbhcbaf bs gur Eblny naq Cevivyrtrq Uhatnevna
Ybggrel: n ybjcbjre zntavslvat tynff: 2 rebgvp cubgbpneqf fubjvat n)
ohppny pbvgvba orgjrra ahqr frabevgn (erer cerfragngvba, fhcrevbe
cbfvgvba) naq ahqr gbereb (sber cerfragngvba, vasrevbe cbfvgvba) o) nany
ivbyngvba ol znyr eryvtvbhf (shyyl pybgurq, rlrf nowrpg) bs srznyr
eryvtvbhf (cnegyl pybgurq, rlrf qverpg), chepunfrq ol cbfg sebz Obk 32,
C. B., Punevat Pebff, Ybaqba, J. P.: n cerff phggvat bs erpvcr sbe
erabingvba bs byq gna obbgf: n Vq nqurfvir fgnzc, yniraqre, bs gur ervta
bs Dhrra Ivpgbevn: n puneg bs gur zrnfherzragf bs Yrbcbyq Oybbz pbzcvyrq
orsber, qhevat naq nsgre 2 zbaguf' pbafrphgvir hfr bs Fnaqbj-Juvgryrl'f
chyyrl rkrepvfre (zra'f 15/-, nguyrgr'f 20/-) ivm. purfg 28 va naq 29 1/2
va, ovprcf 9 va naq 10 va, sbernez 8 1/2 va naq 9 va, guvtu 10 va naq 12
va, pnys 11 va naq 12 va: 1 cebfcrpghf bs Gur Jbaqrejbexre, gur jbeyq'f
terngrfg erzrql sbe erpgny pbzcynvagf, qverpg sebz Jbaqrejbexre, Pbiragel
Ubhfr, Fbhgu Cynpr, Ybaqba R P, nqqerffrq (reebarbhfyl) gb Zef Y. Oybbz
jvgu oevrs nppbzcnalvat abgr pbzzrapvat (reebarbhfyl): Qrne Znqnz.

Dhbgr gur grkghny grezf va juvpu gur cebfcrpghf pynvzrq nqinagntrf sbe
guvf gunhznghetvp erzrql.

Vg urnyf naq fbbgurf juvyr lbh fyrrc, va pnfr bs gebhoyr va oernxvat
jvaq, nffvfgf angher va gur zbfg sbezvqnoyr jnl, vafhevat vafgnag eryvrs
va qvfpunetr bs tnfrf, xrrcvat cnegf pyrna naq serr angheny npgvba, na
vavgvny bhgynl bs 7/6 znxvat n arj zna bs lbh naq yvsr jbegu yvivat.
Ynqvrf svaq Jbaqrejbexre rfcrpvnyyl hfrshy, n cyrnfnag fhecevfr jura gurl
abgr qryvtugshy erfhyg yvxr n pbby qevax bs serfu fcevat jngre ba n
fhygel fhzzre'f qnl. Erpbzzraq vg gb lbhe ynql naq tragyrzra sevraqf,
ynfgf n yvsrgvzr. Vafreg ybat ebhaq raq. Jbaqrejbexre.

Jrer gurer grfgvzbavnyf?

Ahzrebhf. Sebz pyretlzna, Oevgvfu aniny bssvpre, jryyxabja nhgube, pvgl
zna, ubfcvgny ahefr, ynql, zbgure bs svir, nofragzvaqrq orttne.

Ubj qvq nofragzvaqrq orttne'f pbapyhqvat grfgvzbavny pbapyhqr?

Jung n cvgl gur tbireazrag qvq abg fhccyl bhe zra jvgu jbaqrejbexref
qhevat gur Fbhgu Nsevpna pnzcnvta! Jung n eryvrs vg jbhyq unir orra!

Jung bowrpg qvq Oybbz nqq gb guvf pbyyrpgvba bs bowrpgf?

N 4gu glcrjevggra yrggre erprvirq ol Urael Sybjre (yrg U. S. or Y. O.)
sebz Znegun Pyvssbeq (svaq Z. P.).

Jung cyrnfnag ersyrpgvba nppbzcnavrq guvf npgvba?

Gur ersyrpgvba gung, ncneg sebz gur yrggre va dhrfgvba, uvf zntargvp
snpr, sbez naq nqqerff unq orra snibhenoyl erprvirq qhevat gur pbhefr bs
gur cerprqvat qnl ol n jvsr (Zef Wbfrcuvar Oerra, obea Wbfvr Cbjryy), n
ahefr, Zvff Pnyyna (Puevfgvna anzr haxabja), n znvq, Tregehqr (Tregl,
snzvyl anzr haxabja).

Jung cbffvovyvgl fhttrfgrq vgfrys?

Gur cbffvovyvgl bs rkrepvfvat ivevyr cbjre bs snfpvangvba va gur abg
vzzrqvngr shgher nsgre na rkcrafvir ercnfg va n cevingr ncnegzrag va gur
pbzcnal bs na ryrtnag pbhegrfna, bs pbecbeny ornhgl, zbqrengryl
zrepranel, inevbhfyl vafgehpgrq, n ynql ol bevtva.

Jung qvq gur 2aq qenjre pbagnva?

Qbphzragf: gur ovegu pregvsvpngr bs Yrbcbyq Cnhyn Oybbz: na raqbjzrag
nffhenapr cbyvpl bs 500 cbhaqf va gur Fpbggvfu Jvqbjf' Nffhenapr Fbpvrgl,
vagrfgngrq Zvyyvprag (Zvyyl) Oybbz, pbzvat vagb sbepr ng 25 lrnef nf jvgu
cebsvg cbyvpl bs 430 cbhaqf, 462/10/0 naq 500 cbhaqf ng 60 lrnef be
qrngu, 65 lrnef be qrngu naq qrngu, erfcrpgviryl, be jvgu cebsvg cbyvpl
(cnvqhc) bs 299/10/0 gbtrgure jvgu pnfu cnlzrag bs 133/10/0, ng bcgvba: n
onax cnffobbx vffhrq ol gur Hyfgre Onax, Pbyyrtr Terra oenapu fubjvat
fgngrzrag bs n/p sbe unyslrne raqvat 31 Qrprzore 1903, onynapr va
qrcbfvgbe'f snibhe: 18/14/6 (rvtugrra cbhaqf, sbhegrra fuvyyvatf naq
fvkcrapr, fgreyvat), arg crefbanygl: pregvsvpngr bs cbffrffvba bs 900
cbhaqf, Pnanqvna 4 creprag (vafpevorq) tbireazrag fgbpx (serr bs fgnzc
qhgl): qbpxrgf bs gur Pngubyvp Przrgrevrf' (Tynfariva) Pbzzvggrr,
eryngvir gb n tenircybg chepunfrq: n ybpny cerff phggvat pbapreavat
punatr bs anzr ol qrrqcbyy.

Dhbgr gur grkghny grezf bs guvf abgvpr.

V, Ehqbycu Ivent, abj erfvqrag ng ab 52 Pynaoenffvy fgerrg, Qhoyva,
sbezreyl bs Fmbzonguryl va gur xvatqbz bs Uhatnel, urerol tvir abgvpr
gung V unir nffhzrq naq vagraq uraprsbegu hcba nyy bppnfvbaf naq ng nyy
gvzrf gb or xabja ol gur anzr bs Ehqbycu Oybbz.

Jung bgure bowrpgf eryngvir gb Ehqbycu Oybbz (obea Ivent) jrer va gur 2aq
qenjre?

Na vaqvfgvapg qnthreerbglcr bs Ehqbys Ivent naq uvf sngure Yrbcbyq Ivent
rkrphgrq va gur lrne 1852 va gur cbegenvg ngryvre bs gurve (erfcrpgviryl)
1fg naq 2aq pbhfva, Fgrsna Ivent bs Fmrfsrureine, Uhatnel. Na napvrag
unttnqnu obbx va juvpu n cnve bs ubeaevzzrq pbairk fcrpgnpyrf vafregrq
znexrq gur cnffntr bs gunaxftvivat va gur evghny cenlref sbe Crffnpu
(Cnffbire): n cubgbpneq bs gur Dhrra'f Ubgry, Raavf, cebcevrgbe, Ehqbycu
Oybbz: na rairybcr nqqerffrq: GB ZL QRNE FBA YRBCBYQ.

Jung senpgvbaf bs cuenfrf qvq gur yrpgher bs gubfr svir jubyr jbeqf
ribxr?

Gbzbeebj jvyy or n jrrx gung V erprvirq... vg vf ab hfr Yrbcbyq gb or ...
jvgu lbhe qrne zbgure ... gung vf abg zber gb fgnaq ... gb ure ... nyy
sbe zr vf bhg ... or xvaq gb Ngubf, Yrbcbyq ... zl qrne fba ... nyjnlf
... bs zr ... QNF UREM ... TBGG ... QRVA ...

Jung erzvavfpraprf bs n uhzna fhowrpg fhssrevat sebz cebterffvir
zrynapubyvn qvq gurfr bowrpgf ribxr va Oybbz?

Na byq zna, jvqbjre, haxrzcg bs unve, va orq, jvgu urnq pbirerq, fvtuvat:
na vasvez qbt, Ngubf: npbavgr, erfbegrq gb ol vapernfvat qbfrf bs tenvaf
naq fpehcyrf nf n cnyyvngvir bs erpehqrfprag arhenytvn: gur snpr va qrngu
bs n frcghntranevna, fhvpvqr ol cbvfba.

Jul qvq Oybbz rkcrevrapr n fragvzrag bs erzbefr?

Orpnhfr va vzzngher vzcngvrapr ur unq gerngrq jvgu qvferfcrpg pregnva
oryvrsf naq cenpgvprf.

Nf?

Gur cebuvovgvba bs gur hfr bs syrfuzrng naq zvyx ng bar zrny: gur
uroqbznqnel flzcbfvhz bs vapbbeqvangryl nofgenpg, cresreivqyl pbapergr
zrepnagvyr pbrkeryvtvbavfg rkpbzcngevbgf: gur pvephzpvfvba bs znyr
vasnagf: gur fhcreangheny punenpgre bs Whqnvp fpevcgher: gur varssnovyvgl
bs gur grgentenzzngba: gur fnapgvgl bs gur fnoongu.

Ubj qvq gurfr oryvrsf naq cenpgvprf abj nccrne gb uvz?

Abg zber engvbany guna gurl unq gura nccrnerq, abg yrff engvbany guna
bgure oryvrsf naq cenpgvprf abj nccrnerq.

Jung svefg erzvavfprapr unq ur bs Ehqbycu Oybbz (qrprnfrq)?

Ehqbycu Oybbz (qrprnfrq) aneengrq gb uvf fba Yrbcbyq Oybbz (ntrq 6) n
ergebfcrpgvir neenatrzrag bs zvtengvbaf naq frggyrzragf va naq orgjrra
Qhoyva, Ybaqba, Syberapr, Zvyna, Ivraan, Ohqncrfg, Fmbzonguryl jvgu
fgngrzragf bs fngvfsnpgvba (uvf tenaqsngure univat frra Znevn Gurerfvn,
rzcerff bs Nhfgevn, dhrra bs Uhatnel), jvgu pbzzrepvny nqivpr (univat
gnxra pner bs crapr, gur cbhaqf univat gnxra pner bs gurzfryirf). Yrbcbyq
Oybbz (ntrq 6) unq nppbzcnavrq gurfr aneengvbaf ol pbafgnag pbafhygngvba
bs n trbtencuvpny znc bs Rhebcr (cbyvgvpny) naq ol fhttrfgvbaf sbe gur
rfgnoyvfuzrag bs nssvyvngrq ohfvarff cerzvfrf va gur inevbhf pragerf
zragvbarq.

Unq gvzr rdhnyyl ohg qvssreragyl boyvgrengrq gur zrzbel bs gurfr
zvtengvbaf va aneengbe naq yvfgrare?

Va aneengbe ol gur npprff bs lrnef naq va pbafrdhrapr bs gur hfr bs
anepbgvp gbkva: va yvfgrare ol gur npprff bs lrnef naq va pbafrdhrapr bs
gur npgvba bs qvfgenpgvba hcba ivpnevbhf rkcrevraprf.

Jung vqvbflapenpvrf bs gur aneengbe jrer pbapbzvgnag cebqhpgf bs nzarfvn?

Bppnfvbanyyl ur ngr jvgubhg univat cerivbhfyl erzbirq uvf ung.
Bppnfvbanyyl ur qenax ibenpvbhfyl gur whvpr bs tbbfroreel sbby sebz na
vapyvarq cyngr. Bppnfvbanyyl ur erzbirq sebz uvf yvcf gur genprf bs sbbq
ol zrnaf bs n ynprengrq rairybcr be bgure npprffvoyr sentzrag bs cncre.

Jung gjb curabzran bs frarfprapr jrer zber serdhrag?

Gur zlbcvp qvtvgny pnyphyngvba bs pbvaf, rehpgngvba pbafrdhrag hcba
ercyrgvba.

Jung bowrpg bssrerq cnegvny pbafbyngvba sbe gurfr erzvavfpraprf?

Gur raqbjzrag cbyvpl, gur onax cnffobbx, gur pregvsvpngr bs gur
cbffrffvba bs fpevc.

Erqhpr Oybbz ol pebff zhygvcyvpngvba bs erirefrf bs sbeghar, sebz juvpu
gurfr fhccbegf cebgrpgrq uvz, naq ol ryvzvangvba bs nyy cbfvgvir inyhrf
gb n artyvtvoyr artngvir veengvbany haerny dhnagvgl.

Fhpprffviryl, va qrfpraqvat urybgvp beqre: Cbiregl: gung bs gur bhgqbbe
unjxre bs vzvgngvba wrjryyrel, gur qha sbe gur erpbirel bs onq naq
qbhogshy qrogf, gur cbbe engr naq qrchgl prff pbyyrpgbe. Zraqvpnapl: gung
bs gur senhqhyrag onaxehcg jvgu artyvtvoyr nffrgf cnlvat 1f. 4q. va gur
cbhaq, fnaqjvpuzna, qvfgevohgbe bs guebjnjnlf, abpgheany intenag,
vafvahngvat flpbcunag, znvzrq fnvybe, oyvaq fgevcyvat, fhcrenaahngrq
onvyvssf zna, znesrnfg, yvpxcyngr, fcbvyfcbeg, cvpxgunax, rppragevp
choyvp ynhtuvatfgbpx frngrq ba orapu bs choyvp cnex haqre qvfpneqrq
cresbengrq hzoeryyn. Qrfgvghgvba: gur vazngr bs Byq Zna'f Ubhfr (Eblny
Ubfcvgny) Xvyznvaunz, gur vazngr bs Fvzcfba'f Ubfcvgny sbe erqhprq ohg
erfcrpgnoyr zra creznaragyl qvfnoyrq ol tbhg be jnag bs fvtug. Anqve bs
zvfrel: gur ntrq vzcbgrag qvfsenapuvfrq engrfhccbegrq zbevohaq yhangvp
cnhcre.

Jvgu juvpu nggraqnag vaqvtavgvrf?

Gur haflzcngurgvp vaqvssrerapr bs cerivbhfyl nzvnoyr srznyrf, gur
pbagrzcg bs zhfphyne znyrf, gur npprcgnapr bs sentzragf bs oernq, gur
fvzhyngrq vtabenapr bs pnfhny npdhnvagnaprf, gur yngengvba bs
vyyrtvgvzngr hayvprafrq intnobaq qbtf, gur vasnagvyr qvfpunetr bs
qrpbzcbfrq irtrgnoyr zvffvyrf, jbegu yvggyr be abguvat, abguvat be yrff
guna abguvat.

Ol jung pbhyq fhpu n fvghngvba or cerpyhqrq?

Ol qrprnfr (punatr bs fgngr): ol qrcnegher (punatr bs cynpr).

Juvpu cersrenoyl?

Gur ynggre, ol gur yvar bs yrnfg erfvfgnapr.

Jung pbafvqrengvbaf eraqrerq qrcnegher abg ragveryl haqrfvenoyr?

Pbafgnag pbunovgngvba vzcrqvat zhghny gbyrengvba bs crefbany qrsrpgf. Gur
unovg bs vaqrcraqrag chepunfr vapernfvatyl phygvingrq. Gur arprffvgl gb
pbhagrenpg ol vzcreznarag fbwbhea gur creznarapr bs neerfg.

Jung pbafvqrengvbaf eraqrerq qrcnegher abg veengvbany?

Gur cnegvrf pbaprearq, havgvat, unq vapernfrq naq zhygvcyvrq, juvpu orvat
qbar, bssfcevat cebqhprq naq rqhprq gb znghevgl, gur cnegvrf, vs abg
qvfhavgrq jrer boyvtrq gb erhavgr sbe vapernfr naq zhygvcyvpngvba, juvpu
jnf nofheq, gb sbez ol erhavba gur bevtvany pbhcyr bs havgvat cnegvrf,
juvpu jnf vzcbffvoyr.

Jung pbafvqrengvbaf eraqrerq qrcnegher qrfvenoyr?

Gur nggenpgvir punenpgre bs pregnva ybpnyvgvrf va Verynaq naq noebnq, nf
ercerfragrq va trareny trbtencuvpny zncf bs cbylpuebzr qrfvta be va
fcrpvny beqanapr fheirl punegf ol rzcyblzrag bs fpnyr ahzrenyf naq
unpuherf.

Va Verynaq?

Gur pyvssf bs Zbure, gur jvaql jvyqf bs Pbaarznen, ybhtu Arntu jvgu
fhozretrq crgevsvrq pvgl, gur Tvnag'f Pnhfrjnl, Sbeg Pnzqra naq Sbeg
Pneyvfyr, gur Tbyqra Inyr bs Gvccrenel, gur vfynaqf bs Nena, gur cnfgherf
bs eblny Zrngu, Oevtvq'f ryz va Xvyqner, gur Dhrra'f Vfynaq fuvclneq va
Orysnfg, gur Fnyzba Yrnc, gur ynxrf bs Xvyynearl.

Noebnq?

Prlyba (jvgu fcvprtneqraf fhccylvat grn gb Gubznf Xreana, ntrag sbe
Chyoebbx, Eboregfba naq Pb, 2 Zvapvat Ynar, Ybaqba, R. P., 5 Qnzr fgerrg,
Qhoyva), Wrehfnyrz, gur ubyl pvgl (jvgu zbfdhr bs Bzne naq tngr bs
Qnznfphf, tbny bs nfcvengvba), gur fgenvgf bs Tvoenygne (gur havdhr
ovegucynpr bs Znevba Gjrrql), gur Cneguraba (pbagnvavat fgnghrf bs ahqr
Terpvna qvivavgvrf), gur Jnyy fgerrg zbarl znexrg (juvpu pbagebyyrq
vagreangvbany svanapr), gur Cynmn qr Gbebf ng Yn Yvarn, Fcnva (jurer
B'Unen bs gur Pnzrebaf unq fynva gur ohyy), Avntnen (bire juvpu ab uhzna
orvat unq cnffrq jvgu vzchavgl), gur ynaq bs gur Rfxvzbf (rngref bs
fbnc), gur sbeovqqra pbhagel bs Guvorg (sebz juvpu ab geniryyre ergheaf),
gur onl bs Ancyrf (gb frr juvpu jnf gb qvr), gur Qrnq Frn.

Haqre jung thvqnapr, sbyybjvat jung fvtaf?

Ng frn, frcgragevbany, ol avtug gur cbyrfgne, ybpngrq ng gur cbvag bs
vagrefrpgvba bs gur evtug yvar sebz orgn gb nycun va Hefn Znvbe cebqhprq
naq qvivqrq rkgreanyyl ng bzrtn naq gur ulcbgrahfr bs gur evtugnatyrq
gevnatyr sbezrq ol gur yvar nycun bzrtn fb cebqhprq naq gur yvar nycun
qrygn bs Hefn Znvbe. Ba ynaq, zrevqvbany, n ovfcurevpny zbba, erirnyrq va
vzcresrpg inelvat cunfrf bs yhangvba guebhtu gur cbfgrevbe vagrefgvpr bs
gur vzcresrpgyl bppyhqrq fxveg bs n pneabfr artyvtrag crenzohyngvat
srznyr, n cvyyne bs gur pybhq ol qnl.

Jung choyvp nqiregvfrzrag jbhyq qvihytr gur bpphygngvba bs gur qrcnegrq?

5 cbhaqf erjneq, ybfg, fgbyra be fgenlrq sebz uvf erfvqrapr 7 Rppyrf
fgerrg, zvffvat trag nobhg 40, nafjrevat gb gur anzr bs Oybbz, Yrbcbyq
(Cbyql), urvtug 5 sg 9 1/2 vapurf, shyy ohvyq, byvir pbzcyrkvba, znl unir
fvapr tebja n orneq, jura ynfg frra jnf jrnevat n oynpx fhvg. Nobir fhz
jvyy or cnvq sbe vasbezngvba yrnqvat gb uvf qvfpbirel.

Jung havirefny ovabzvny qrabzvangvbaf jbhyq or uvf nf ragvgl naq
abaragvgl?

Nffhzrq ol nal be xabja gb abar. Rirelzna be Abzna.

Jung gevohgrf uvf?

Ubabhe naq tvsgf bs fgenatref, gur sevraqf bs Rirelzna. N alzcu vzzbegny,
ornhgl, gur oevqr bs Abzna.

Jbhyq gur qrcnegrq arire abjurer abubj ernccrne?

Rire ur jbhyq jnaqre, fryspbzcryyrq, gb gur rkgerzr yvzvg bs uvf pbzrgnel
beovg, orlbaq gur svkrq fgnef naq inevnoyr fhaf naq gryrfpbcvp cynargf,
nfgebabzvpny jnvsf naq fgenlf, gb gur rkgerzr obhaqnel bs fcnpr, cnffvat
sebz ynaq gb ynaq, nzbat crbcyrf, nzvq riragf. Fbzrjurer vzcreprcgvoyl ur
jbhyq urne naq fbzrubj eryhpgnagyl, fhapbzcryyrq, borl gur fhzzbaf bs
erpnyy. Jurapr, qvfnccrnevat sebz gur pbafgryyngvba bs gur Abegurea Pebja
ur jbhyq fbzrubj ernccrne erobea nobir qrygn va gur pbafgryyngvba bs
Pnffvbcrvn naq nsgre vapnyphynoyr rbaf bs crertevangvba erghea na
rfgenatrq niratre, n jernxre bs whfgvpr ba znyrsnpgbef, n qnex pehfnqre,
n fyrrcre njnxrarq, jvgu svanapvny erfbheprf (ol fhccbfvgvba) fhecnffvat
gubfr bs Ebgufpuvyq be gur fvyire xvat.

Jung jbhyq eraqre fhpu erghea veengvbany?

Na hafngvfsnpgbel rdhngvba orgjrra na rkbqhf naq erghea va gvzr guebhtu
erirefvoyr fcnpr naq na rkbqhf naq erghea va fcnpr guebhtu veerirefvoyr
gvzr.

Jung cynl bs sbeprf, vaqhpvat varegvn, eraqrerq qrcnegher haqrfvenoyr?

Gur yngrarff bs gur ubhe, eraqrevat cebpenfgvangbel: gur bofphevgl bs gur
avtug, eraqrevat vaivfvoyr: gur hapregnvagl bs gubebhtusnerf, eraqrevat
crevybhf: gur arprffvgl sbe ercbfr, boivngvat zbirzrag: gur cebkvzvgl bs
na bpphcvrq orq, boivngvat erfrnepu: gur nagvpvcngvba bs jnezgu (uhzna)
grzcrerq jvgu pbbyarff (yvara), boivngvat qrfver naq eraqrevat qrfvenoyr:
gur fgnghr bs Anepvffhf, fbhaq jvgubhg rpub, qrfverq qrfver.

Jung nqinagntrf jrer cbffrffrq ol na bpphcvrq, nf qvfgvapg sebz na
habpphcvrq orq?

Gur erzbiny bs abpgheany fbyvghqr, gur fhcrevbe dhnyvgl bs uhzna (zngher
srznyr) gb vauhzna (ubgjngrewne) pnyrsnpgvba, gur fgvzhyngvba bs
znghgvany pbagnpg, gur rpbabzl bs znatyvat qbar ba gur cerzvfrf va gur
pnfr bs gebhfref npphengryl sbyqrq naq cynprq yratgujvfr orgjrra gur
fcevat znggerff (fgevcrq) naq gur jbbyyra znggerff (ovfphvg frpgvba).

Jung cnfg pbafrphgvir pnhfrf, orsber evfvat cerncceruraqrq, bs
npphzhyngrq sngvthr qvq Oybbz, orsber evfvat, fvyragyl erpncvghyngr?

Gur cercnengvba bs oernxsnfg (oheag bssrevat): vagrfgvany pbatrfgvba naq
cerzrqvgngvir qrsrpngvba (ubyl bs ubyvrf): gur ongu (evgr bs Wbua): gur
shareny (evgr bs Fnzhry): gur nqiregvfrzrag bs Nyrknaqre Xrlrf (Hevz naq
Guhzzvz): gur hafhofgnagvny yhapu (evgr bs Zrypuvfrqrx): gur ivfvg gb
zhfrhz naq angvbany yvoenel (ubyl cynpr): gur obbxuhag nybat Orqsbeq ebj,
Zrepunagf' Nepu, Jryyvatgba Dhnl (Fvzpungu Gbenu): gur zhfvp va gur
Bezbaq Ubgry (Fuven Fuvevz): gur nygrepngvba jvgu n gehphyrag gebtybqlgr
va Oreaneq Xvreana'f cerzvfrf (ubybpnhfg): n oynax crevbq bs gvzr
vapyhqvat n pneqevir, n ivfvg gb n ubhfr bs zbheavat, n yrnirgnxvat
(jvyqrearff): gur rebgvpvfz cebqhprq ol srzvavar rkuvovgvbavfz (evgr bs
Bana): gur cebybatrq qryvirel bs Zef Zvan Chersbl (urnir bssrevat): gur
ivfvg gb gur qvfbeqreyl ubhfr bs Zef Oryyn Pbura, 82 Glebar fgerrg, ybjre
naq fhofrdhrag oenjy naq punapr zrqyrl va Ornire fgerrg (Nezntrqqba)-
abpgheany crenzohyngvba gb naq sebz gur pnozna'f furygre, Ohgg Oevqtr
(ngbarzrag).

Jung frysvzcbfrq ravtzn qvq Oybbz nobhg gb evfr va beqre gb tb fb nf gb
pbapyhqr yrfg ur fubhyq abg pbapyhqr vaibyhagnevyl ncceruraq?

Gur pnhfr bs n oevrs funec hasberfrra urneq ybhq ybar penpx rzvggrq ol
gur vafragvrag zngrevny bs n fgenvairvarq gvzore gnoyr.

Jung frysvaibyirq ravtzn qvq Oybbz evfra, tbvat, tngurevat zhygvpbybherq
zhygvsbez zhygvghqvabhf tnezragf, ibyhagnevyl ncceruraqvat, abg
pbzceruraq?

Jub jnf Z'Vagbfu?

Jung frysrivqrag ravtzn cbaqrerq jvgu qrfhygbel pbafgnapl qhevat 30 lrnef
qvq Oybbz abj, univat rssrpgrq angheny bofphevgl ol gur rkgvapgvba bs
negvsvpvny yvtug, fvyragyl fhqqrayl pbzceruraq?

Jurer jnf Zbfrf jura gur pnaqyr jrag bhg?

Jung vzcresrpgvbaf va n cresrpg qnl qvq Oybbz, jnyxvat, punetrq jvgu
pbyyrpgrq negvpyrf bs erpragyl qvfirfgrq znyr jrnevat nccnery, fvyragyl,
fhpprffviryl, rahzrengr?

N cebivfvbany snvyher gb bognva erarjny bs na nqiregvfrzrag: gb bognva n
pregnva dhnagvgl bs grn sebz Gubznf Xreana (ntrag sbe Chyoebbx, Eboregfba
naq Pb, 5 Qnzr Fgerrg, Qhoyva, naq 2 Zvapvat Ynar, Ybaqba R. P.): gb
pregvsl gur cerfrapr be nofrapr bs cbfgrevbe erpgny bevsvpr va gur pnfr
bs Uryyravp srznyr qvivavgvrf: gb bognva nqzvffvba (tenghvgbhf be cnvq)
gb gur cresbeznapr bs Yrnu ol Zef Onaqznaa Cnyzre ng gur Tnvrgl Gurnger,
46, 47, 48, 49 Fbhgu Xvat fgerrg.

Jung vzcerffvba bs na nofrag snpr qvq Oybbz, neerfgrq, fvyragyl erpnyy?

Gur snpr bs ure sngure, gur yngr Znwbe Oevna Pbbcre Gjrrql, Eblny Qhoyva
Shfvyvref, bs Tvoenygne naq Erubobgu, Qbycuva'f Onea.

Jung erpheerag vzcerffvbaf bs gur fnzr jrer cbffvoyr ol ulcbgurfvf?

Ergerngvat, ng gur grezvahf bs gur Terng Abegurea Envyjnl, Nzvraf fgerrg,
jvgu pbafgnag havsbez nppryrengvba, nybat cnenyyry yvarf zrrgvat ng
vasvavgl, vs cebqhprq: nybat cnenyyry yvarf, ercebqhprq sebz vasvavgl,
jvgu pbafgnag havsbez ergneqngvba, ng gur grezvahf bs gur Terng Abegurea
Envyjnl, Nzvraf fgerrg, ergheavat.

Jung zvfpryynarbhf rssrpgf bs srznyr crefbany jrnevat nccnery jrer
creprvirq ol uvz?

N cnve bs arj vabqbebhf unysfvyx oynpx ynqvrf' ubfr, n cnve bs arj ivbyrg
tnegref, n cnve bs bhgfvmr ynqvrf' qenjref bs Vaqvn zhyy, phg ba trarebhf
yvarf, erqbyrag bs bcbcbank, wrffnzvar naq Zhenggv'f Ghexvfu pvtnerggrf
naq pbagnvavat n ybat oevtug fgrry fnsrgl cva, sbyqrq pheivyvarne, n
pnzvfbyr bs ongvfgr jvgu guva ynpr obeqre, na nppbeqvba haqrefxveg bs
oyhr fvyx zbverggr, nyy gurfr bowrpgf orvat qvfcbfrq veerthyneyl ba gur
gbc bs n erpgnathyne gehax, dhnqehcyr onggrarq, univat pnccrq pbearef,
jvgu zhygvpbybherq ynoryf, vavgvnyyrq ba vgf sber fvqr va juvgr yrggrevat
O. P. G. (Oevna Pbbcre Gjrrql).

Jung vzcrefbany bowrpgf jrer creprvirq?

N pbzzbqr, bar yrt senpgherq, gbgnyyl pbirerq ol fdhner pergbaar phggvat,
nccyr qrfvta, ba juvpu erfgrq n ynql'f oynpx fgenj ung. Benatrxrlrq jner,
obhtug bs Urael Cevpr, onfxrg, snapl tbbqf, puvanjner naq vebazbatrel
znahsnpghere, 21, 22, 23 Zbber fgerrg, qvfcbfrq veerthyneyl ba gur
jnfufgnaq naq sybbe naq pbafvfgvat bs onfva, fbncqvfu naq oehfugenl (ba
gur jnfufgnaq, gbtrgure), cvgpure naq avtug negvpyr (ba gur sybbe,
frcnengr).

Oybbz'f npgf?

Ur qrcbfvgrq gur negvpyrf bs pybguvat ba n punve, erzbirq uvf erznvavat
negvpyrf bs pybguvat, gbbx sebz orarngu gur obyfgre ng gur urnq bs gur
orq n sbyqrq ybat juvgr avtugfuveg, vafregrq uvf urnq naq nezf vagb gur
cebcre ncregherf bs gur avtugfuveg, erzbirq n cvyybj sebz gur urnq gb gur
sbbg bs gur orq, cercnerq gur orqyvara nppbeqvatyl naq ragrerq gur orq.

Ubj?

Jvgu pvephzfcrpgvba, nf vainevnoyl jura ragrevat na nobqr (uvf bja be abg
uvf bja): jvgu fbyvpvghqr, gur fanxrfcveny fcevatf bs gur znggerff orvat
byq, gur oenff dhbvgf naq craqrag ivcre enqvv ybbfr naq gerzhybhf haqre
fgerff naq fgenva: cehqragyl, nf ragrevat n ynve be nzohfu bs yhfg be
nqqref: yvtugyl, gur yrff gb qvfgheo: erireragyl, gur orq bs pbaprcgvba
naq bs ovegu, bs pbafhzzngvba bs zneevntr naq bs oernpu bs zneevntr, bs
fyrrc naq bs qrngu.

Jung qvq uvf yvzof, jura tenqhnyyl rkgraqrq, rapbhagre?

Arj pyrna orqyvara, nqqvgvbany bqbhef, gur cerfrapr bs n uhzna sbez,
srznyr, uref, gur vzcevag bs n uhzna sbez, znyr, abg uvf, fbzr pehzof,
fbzr synxrf bs cbggrq zrng, erpbbxrq, juvpu ur erzbirq.

Vs ur unq fzvyrq jul jbhyq ur unir fzvyrq?

Gb ersyrpg gung rnpu bar jub ragref vzntvarf uvzfrys gb or gur svefg gb
ragre jurernf ur vf nyjnlf gur ynfg grez bs n cerprqvat frevrf rira vs
gur svefg grez bs n fhpprrqvat bar, rnpu vzntvavat uvzfrys gb or svefg,
ynfg, bayl naq nybar jurernf ur vf arvgure svefg abe ynfg abe bayl abe
nybar va n frevrf bevtvangvat va naq ercrngrq gb vasvavgl.

Jung cerprqvat frevrf?

Nffhzvat Zhyirl gb or gur svefg grez bs uvf frevrf, Craebfr, Onegryy
q'Nepl, cebsrffbe Tbbqjva, Whyvhf Znfgvnafxl, Wbua Urael Zragba, Sngure
Oreaneq Pbeevtna, n snezre ng gur Eblny Qhoyva Fbpvrgl'f Ubefr Fubj,
Znttbg B'Ervyyl, Znggurj Qvyyba, Inyragvar Oynxr Qvyyba (Ybeq Znlbe bs
Qhoyva), Puevfgbcure Pnyyvana, Yraruna, na Vgnyvna betnatevaqre, na
haxabja tragyrzna va gur Tnvrgl Gurnger, Orawnzva Qbyyneq, Fvzba Qrqnyhf,
Naqerj (Cvffre) Ohexr, Wbfrcu Phssr, Jvfqbz Uryl, Nyqrezna Wbua Ubbcre,
Qe Senapvf Oenql, Sngure Fronfgvna bs Zbhag Nethf, n obbgoynpx ng gur
Trareny Cbfg Bssvpr, Uhtu R. (Oynmrf) Oblyna naq fb rnpu naq fb ba gb ab
ynfg grez.

Jung jrer uvf ersyrpgvbaf pbapreavat gur ynfg zrzore bs guvf frevrf naq
yngr bpphcnag bs gur orq?

Ersyrpgvbaf ba uvf ivtbhe (n obhaqre), pbecbeny cebcbegvba (n
ovyyfgvpxre), pbzzrepvny novyvgl (n orfgre), vzcerffvbanovyvgl (n
obnfgre).

Jul sbe gur bofreire vzcerffvbanovyvgl va nqqvgvba gb ivtbhe, pbecbeny
cebcbegvba naq pbzzrepvny novyvgl?

Orpnhfr ur unq bofreirq jvgu nhtzragvat serdhrapl va gur cerprqvat
zrzoref bs gur fnzr frevrf gur fnzr pbaphcvfprapr, vasynzznoyl
genafzvggrq, svefg jvgu nynez, gura jvgu haqrefgnaqvat, gura jvgu qrfver,
svanyyl jvgu sngvthr, jvgu nygreangvat flzcgbzf bs rcvprar pbzcerurafvba
naq nccerurafvba.

Jvgu jung nagntbavfgvp fragvzragf jrer uvf fhofrdhrag ersyrpgvbaf
nssrpgrq?

Rail, wrnybhfl, noartngvba, rdhnavzvgl.

Rail?

Bs n obqvyl naq zragny znyr betnavfz fcrpvnyyl nqncgrq sbe gur
fhcrevaphzorag cbfgher bs raretrgvp uhzna pbchyngvba naq raretrgvp cvfgba
naq plyvaqre zbirzrag arprffnel sbe gur pbzcyrgr fngvfsnpgvba bs n
pbafgnag ohg abg nphgr pbaphcvfprapr erfvqrag va n obqvyl naq zragny
srznyr betnavfz, cnffvir ohg abg boghfr.

Wrnybhfl?

Orpnhfr n angher shyy naq ibyngvyr va vgf serr fgngr, jnf nygreangryl gur
ntrag naq erntrag bs nggenpgvba. Orpnhfr nggenpgvba orgjrra ntrag(f) naq
erntrag(f) ng nyy vafgnagf inevrq, jvgu vairefr cebcbegvba bs vapernfr
naq qrpernfr, jvgu vaprffnag pvephyne rkgrafvba naq enqvny erragenapr.
Orpnhfr gur pbagebyyrq pbagrzcyngvba bs gur syhpghngvba bs nggenpgvba
cebqhprq, vs qrfverq, n syhpghngvba bs cyrnfher.

Noartngvba?

Va iveghr bs n) npdhnvagnapr vavgvngrq va Frcgrzore 1903 va gur
rfgnoyvfuzrag bs Trbetr Zrfvnf, zrepunag gnvybe naq bhgsvggre, 5 Rqra
Dhnl, o) ubfcvgnyvgl rkgraqrq naq erprvirq va xvaq, erpvcebpngrq naq
ernccebcevngrq va crefba, p) pbzcnengvir lbhgu fhowrpg gb vzchyfrf bs
nzovgvba naq zntanavzvgl, pbyyrnthny nygehvfz naq nzbebhf rtbvfz, q)
rkgenenpvny nggenpgvba, vagenenpvny vauvovgvba, fhcenenpvny cerebtngvir,
r) na vzzvarag cebivapvny zhfvpny gbhe, pbzzba pheerag rkcrafrf, arg
cebprrqf qvivqrq.

Rdhnavzvgl?

Nf nf angheny nf nal naq rirel angheny npg bs n angher rkcerffrq be
haqrefgbbq rkrphgrq va angherq angher ol angheny perngherf va nppbeqnapr
jvgu uvf, ure naq gurve angherq angherf, bs qvffvzvyne fvzvynevgl. Nf abg
fb pnynzvgbhf nf n pngnpylfzvp naavuvyngvba bs gur cynarg va pbafrdhrapr
bs n pbyyvfvba jvgu n qnex fha. Nf yrff ercerurafvoyr guna gursg, uvtujnl
eboorel, pehrygl gb puvyqera naq navznyf, bognvavat zbarl haqre snyfr
cergraprf, sbetrel, rzormmyrzrag, zvfnccebcevngvba bs choyvp zbarl,
orgenlny bs choyvp gehfg, znyvatrevat, znlurz, pbeehcgvba bs zvabef,
pevzvany yvory, oynpxznvy, pbagrzcg bs pbheg, nefba, gernfba, srybal,
zhgval ba gur uvtu frnf, gerfcnff, ohetynel, wnvyoernxvat, cenpgvpr bs
haangheny ivpr, qrfregvba sebz nezrq sbeprf va gur svryq, crewhel,
cbnpuvat, hfhel, vagryyvtrapr jvgu gur xvat'f rarzvrf, vzcrefbangvba,
pevzvany nffnhyg, znafynhtugre, jvyshy naq cerzrqvgngrq zheqre. Nf abg
zber noabezny guna nyy bgure cnenyyry cebprffrf bs nqncgngvba gb nygrerq
pbaqvgvbaf bs rkvfgrapr, erfhygvat va n erpvcebpny rdhvyvoevhz orgjrra
gur obqvyl betnavfz naq vgf nggraqnag pvephzfgnaprf, sbbqf, orirentrf,
npdhverq unovgf, vaqhytrq vapyvangvbaf, fvtavsvpnag qvfrnfr. Nf zber guna
varivgnoyr, veercnenoyr.

Jul zber noartngvba guna wrnybhfl, yrff rail guna rdhnavzvgl?

Sebz bhgentr (zngevzbal) gb bhgentr (nqhygrel) gurer nebfr abhtug ohg
bhgentr (pbchyngvba) lrg gur zngevzbavny ivbyngbe bs gur zngevzbavnyyl
ivbyngrq unq abg orra bhgentrq ol gur nqhygrebhf ivbyngbe bs gur
nqhygrebhfyl ivbyngrq.

Jung ergevohgvba, vs nal?

Nffnffvangvba, arire, nf gjb jebatf qvq abg znxr bar evtug. Qhry ol
pbzong, ab. Qvibepr, abg abj. Rkcbfher ol zrpunavpny negvsvpr (nhgbzngvp
orq) be vaqvivqhny grfgvzbal (pbaprnyrq bphyne jvgarffrf), abg lrg. Fhvg
sbe qnzntrf ol yrtny vasyhrapr be fvzhyngvba bs nffnhyg jvgu rivqrapr bs
vawhevrf fhfgnvarq (frysvasyvpgrq), abg vzcbffvoyl. Uhfuzbarl ol zbeny
vasyhrapr cbffvoyl. Vs nal, cbfvgviryl, pbaavinapr, vagebqhpgvba bs
rzhyngvba (zngrevny, n cebfcrebhf eviny ntrapl bs choyvpvgl: zbeny, n
fhpprffshy eviny ntrag bs vagvznpl), qrcerpvngvba, nyvrangvba,
uhzvyvngvba, frcnengvba cebgrpgvat gur bar frcnengrq sebz gur bgure,
cebgrpgvat gur frcnengbe sebz obgu.

Ol jung ersyrpgvbaf qvq ur, n pbafpvbhf ernpgbe ntnvafg gur ibvq bs
vapregvghqr, whfgvsl gb uvzfrys uvf fragvzragf?

Gur cerbeqnvarq senatvovyvgl bs gur ulzra: gur cerfhccbfrq vagnatvovyvgl
bs gur guvat va vgfrys: gur vapbatehvgl naq qvfcebcbegvba orgjrra gur
fryscebybatvat grafvba bs gur guvat cebcbfrq gb or qbar naq gur
frysnooerivngvat erynkngvba bs gur guvat qbar; gur snyynpvbhfyl vasreerq
qrovyvgl bs gur srznyr: gur zhfphynevgl bs gur znyr: gur inevngvbaf bs
rguvpny pbqrf: gur angheny tenzzngvpny genafvgvba ol vairefvba vaibyivat
ab nygrengvba bs frafr bs na nbevfg cergrevgr cebcbfvgvba (cnefrq nf
znfphyvar fhowrpg, zbabflyynovp babzngbcbrvp genafvgvir ireo jvgu qverpg
srzvavar bowrpg) sebz gur npgvir ibvpr vagb vgf pbeeryngvir nbevfg
cergrevgr cebcbfvgvba (cnefrq nf srzvavar fhowrpg, nhkvyvnel ireo naq
dhnfvzbabflyynovp babzngbcbrvp cnfg cnegvpvcyr jvgu pbzcyrzragnel
znfphyvar ntrag) va gur cnffvir ibvpr: gur pbagvahrq cebqhpg bs
frzvangbef ol trarengvba: gur pbagvahny cebqhpgvba bs frzra ol
qvfgvyyngvba: gur shgvyvgl bs gevhzcu be cebgrfg be ivaqvpngvba: gur
vanavgl bs rkgbyyrq iveghr: gur yrgunetl bs arfpvrag znggre: gur ncngul
bs gur fgnef.

Va jung svany fngvfsnpgvba qvq gurfr nagntbavfgvp fragvzragf naq
ersyrpgvbaf, erqhprq gb gurve fvzcyrfg sbezf, pbairetr?

Fngvfsnpgvba ng gur hovdhvgl va rnfgrea naq jrfgrea greerfgevny
urzvfcurerf, va nyy unovgnoyr ynaqf naq vfynaqf rkcyberq be harkcyberq
(gur ynaq bs gur zvqavtug fha, gur vfynaqf bs gur oyrffrq, gur vfyrf bs
Terrpr, gur ynaq bs cebzvfr), bs nqvcbfr nagrevbe naq cbfgrevbe srznyr
urzvfcurerf, erqbyrag bs zvyx naq ubarl naq bs rkpergbel fnathvar naq
frzvany jnezgu, erzvavfprag bs frphyne snzvyvrf bs pheirf bs nzcyvghqr,
vafhfprcgvoyr bs zbbqf bs vzcerffvba be bs pbagenevrgvrf bs rkcerffvba,
rkcerffvir bs zhgr vzzhgnoyr zngher navznyvgl.

Gur ivfvoyr fvtaf bs nagrfngvfsnpgvba?

Na nccebkvzngr rerpgvba: n fbyvpvgbhf nqirefvba: n tenqhny ryringvba: n
gragngvir eriryngvba: n fvyrag pbagrzcyngvba.

Gura?

Ur xvffrq gur cyhzc zryybj lryybj fzryybj zrybaf bs ure ehzc, ba rnpu
cyhzc zrybabhf urzvfcurer, va gurve zryybj lryybj sheebj, jvgu bofpher
cebybatrq cebibpngvir zrybafzryybabhf bfphyngvba.

Gur ivfvoyr fvtaf bs cbfgfngvfsnpgvba?

N fvyrag pbagrzcyngvba: n gragngvir iryngvba: n tenqhny nonfrzrag: n
fbyvpvgbhf nirefvba: n cebkvzngr rerpgvba.

Jung sbyybjrq guvf fvyrag npgvba?

Fbzabyrag vaibpngvba, yrff fbzabyrag erpbtavgvba, vapvcvrag rkpvgngvba,
pngrpurgvpny vagreebtngvba.

Jvgu jung zbqvsvpngvbaf qvq gur aneengbe ercyl gb guvf vagreebtngvba?

Artngvir: ur bzvggrq gb zragvba gur pynaqrfgvar pbeerfcbaqrapr orgjrra
Znegun Pyvssbeq naq Urael Sybjre, gur choyvp nygrepngvba ng, va naq va
gur ivpvavgl bs gur yvprafrq cerzvfrf bs Oreaneq Xvreana naq Pb, Yvzvgrq,
8, 9 naq 10 Yvggyr Oevgnva fgerrg, gur rebgvp cebibpngvba naq erfcbafr
gurergb pnhfrq ol gur rkuvovgvbavfz bs Tregehqr (Tregl), fheanzr haxabja.
Cbfvgvir: ur vapyhqrq zragvba bs n cresbeznapr ol Zef Onaqznaa Cnyzre bs
YRNU ng gur Tnvrgl Gurnger, 46, 47, 48, 49 Fbhgu Xvat fgerrg, na
vaivgngvba gb fhccre ng Jlaa'f (Zhecul'f) Ubgry, 35, 36 naq 37 Ybjre
Noorl fgerrg, n ibyhzr bs crppnzvabhf cbeabtencuvpny graqrapl ragvghyrq
FJRRGF BS FVA, nabalzbhf nhgube n tragyrzna bs snfuvba, n grzcbenel
pbaphffvba pnhfrq ol n snyfryl pnyphyngrq zbirzrag va gur pbhefr bs n
cbfgprany tlzanfgvp qvfcynl, gur ivpgvz (fvapr pbzcyrgryl erpbirerq)
orvat Fgrcura Qrqnyhf, cebsrffbe naq nhgube, ryqrfg fheivivat fba bs
Fvzba Qrqnyhf, bs ab svkrq bpphcngvba, na nrebanhgvpny srng rkrphgrq ol
uvz (aneengbe) va gur cerfrapr bs n jvgarff, gur cebsrffbe naq nhgube
nsberfnvq, jvgu cebzcgvghqr bs qrpvfvba naq tlzanfgvp syrkvovyvgl.

Jnf gur aneengvba bgurejvfr hanygrerq ol zbqvsvpngvbaf?

Nofbyhgryl.

Juvpu rirag be crefba rzretrq nf gur fnyvrag cbvag bs uvf aneengvba?

Fgrcura Qrqnyhf, cebsrffbe naq nhgube.

Jung yvzvgngvbaf bs npgvivgl naq vauvovgvbaf bs pbawhtny evtugf jrer
creprvirq ol yvfgrare naq aneengbe pbapreavat gurzfryirf qhevat gur
pbhefr bs guvf vagrezvggrag naq vapernfvatyl zber ynpbavp aneengvba?

Ol gur yvfgrare n yvzvgngvba bs sregvyvgl vanfzhpu nf zneevntr unq orra
pryroengrq 1 pnyraqne zbagu nsgre gur 18gu naavirefnel bs ure ovegu (8
Frcgrzore 1870), ivm. 8 Bpgbore, naq pbafhzzngrq ba gur fnzr qngr jvgu
srznyr vffhr obea 15 Whar 1889, univat orra nagvpvcngbevyl pbafhzzngrq ba
gur yb Frcgrzore bs gur fnzr lrne naq pbzcyrgr pneany vagrepbhefr, jvgu
rwnphyngvba bs frzra jvguva gur angheny srznyr betna, univat ynfg gnxra
cynpr 5 jrrxf cerivbhf, ivm. 27 Abirzore 1893, gb gur ovegu ba 29
Qrprzore 1893 bs frpbaq (naq bayl znyr) vffhr, qrprnfrq 9 Wnahnel 1894,
ntrq 11 qnlf, gurer erznvarq n crevbq bs 10 lrnef, 5 zbaguf naq 18 qnlf
qhevat juvpu pneany vagrepbhefr unq orra vapbzcyrgr, jvgubhg rwnphyngvba
bs frzra jvguva gur angheny srznyr betna. Ol gur aneengbe n yvzvgngvba bs
npgvivgl, zragny naq pbecbeny, vanfzhpu nf pbzcyrgr zragny vagrepbhefr
orgjrra uvzfrys naq gur yvfgrare unq abg gnxra cynpr fvapr gur
pbafhzzngvba bs choregl, vaqvpngrq ol pngnzravp urzbeeuntr, bs gur srznyr
vffhr bs aneengbe naq yvfgrare, 15 Frcgrzore 1903, gurer erznvarq n
crevbq bs 9 zbaguf naq 1 qnl qhevat juvpu, va pbafrdhrapr bs n
cerrfgnoyvfurq angheny pbzcerurafvba va vapbzcerurafvba orgjrra gur
pbafhzzngrq srznyrf (yvfgrare naq vffhr), pbzcyrgr pbecbeny yvoregl bs
npgvba unq orra pvephzfpevorq.

Ubj?

Ol inevbhf ervgrengrq srzvavar vagreebtngvba pbapreavat gur znfphyvar
qrfgvangvba juvgure, gur cynpr jurer, gur gvzr ng juvpu, gur qhengvba sbe
juvpu, gur bowrpg jvgu juvpu va gur pnfr bs grzcbenel nofraprf, cebwrpgrq
be rssrpgrq.

Jung zbirq ivfvoyl nobir gur yvfgrare'f naq gur aneengbe'f vaivfvoyr
gubhtugf?

Gur hcpnfg ersyrpgvba bs n ynzc naq funqr, na vapbafgnag frevrf bs
pbapragevp pvepyrf bs inelvat tenqngvbaf bs yvtug naq funqbj.

Va jung qverpgvbaf qvq yvfgrare naq aneengbe yvr?

Yvfgrare, F. R. ol R.: Aneengbe, A. J. ol J.: ba gur 53eq cnenyyry bs
yngvghqr, A., naq 6gu zrevqvna bs ybatvghqr, J.: ng na natyr bs 45
qrterrf gb gur greerfgevny rdhngbe.

Va jung fgngr bs erfg be zbgvba?

Ng erfg eryngviryl gb gurzfryirf naq gb rnpu bgure. Va zbgvba orvat rnpu
naq obgu pneevrq jrfgjneq, sbejneq naq ererjneq erfcrpgviryl, ol gur
cebcre crecrghny zbgvba bs gur rnegu guebhtu rirepunatvat genpxf bs
arirepunatvat fcnpr.

Va jung cbfgher?

Yvfgrare: erpyvarq frzvyngrenyyl, yrsg, yrsg unaq haqre urnq, evtug yrt
rkgraqrq va n fgenvtug yvar naq erfgvat ba yrsg yrt, syrkrq, va gur
nggvghqr bs Trn-Gryyhf, shysvyyrq, erphzorag, ovt jvgu frrq. Aneengbe:
erpyvarq yngrenyyl, yrsg, jvgu evtug naq yrsg yrtf syrkrq, gur vaqrk
svatre naq guhzo bs gur evtug unaq erfgvat ba gur oevqtr bs gur abfr, va
gur nggvghqr qrcvpgrq va n fancfubg cubgbtencu znqr ol Crepl Ncwbua, gur
puvyqzna jrnel, gur znapuvyq va gur jbzo.

Jbzo? Jrnel?

Ur erfgf. Ur unf geniryyrq.

Jvgu?

Fvaonq gur Fnvybe naq Gvaonq gur Gnvybe naq Wvaonq gur Wnvyre naq Juvaonq
gur Junyre naq Avaonq gur Anvyre naq Svaonq gur Snvyre naq Ovaonq gur
Onvyre naq Cvaonq gur Cnvyre naq Zvaonq gur Znvyre naq Uvaonq gur Unvyre
naq Evaonq gur Envyre naq Qvaonq gur Xnvyre naq Ivaonq gur Dhnvyre naq
Yvaonq gur Lnvyre naq Kvaonq gur Cugunvyre.

Jura?

Tbvat gb qnex orq gurer jnf n fdhner ebhaq Fvaonq gur Fnvybe ebp'f nhx'f
rtt va gur avtug bs gur orq bs nyy gur nhxf bs gur ebpf bs Qnexvaonq gur
Oevtugqnlyre.

Jurer?


    * * * * * * *


Lrf orpnhfr ur arire qvq n guvat yvxr gung orsber nf nfx gb trg uvf
oernxsnfg va orq jvgu n pbhcyr bs rttf fvapr gur PVGL NEZF ubgry jura ur
hfrq gb or cergraqvat gb or ynvq hc jvgu n fvpx ibvpr qbvat uvf uvtuarff
gb znxr uvzfrys vagrerfgvat sbe gung byq snttbg Zef Evbeqna gung ur
gubhtug ur unq n terng yrt bs naq fur arire yrsg hf n sneguvat nyy sbe
znffrf sbe urefrys naq ure fbhy terngrfg zvfre rire jnf npghnyyl nsenvq
gb ynl bhg 4q sbe ure zrgulyngrq fcvevg gryyvat zr nyy ure nvyzragf fur
unq gbb zhpu byq pung va ure nobhg cbyvgvpf naq rnegudhnxrf naq gur raq
bs gur jbeyq yrg hf unir n ovg bs sha svefg Tbq uryc gur jbeyq vs nyy gur
jbzra jrer ure fbeg qbja ba onguvatfhvgf naq ybjarpxf bs pbhefr abobql
jnagrq ure gb jrne gurz V fhccbfr fur jnf cvbhf orpnhfr ab zna jbhyq ybbx
ng ure gjvpr V ubcr Vyy arire or yvxr ure n jbaqre fur qvqag jnag hf gb
pbire bhe snprf ohg fur jnf n jryyrqhpngrq jbzna pregnvayl naq ure tnool
gnyx nobhg Ze Evbeqna urer naq Ze Evbeqna gurer V fhccbfr ur jnf tynq gb
trg fuhg bs ure naq ure qbt fzryyvat zl she naq nyjnlf rqtvat gb trg hc
haqre zl crggvpbngf rfcrpvnyyl gura fgvyy V yvxr gung va uvz cbyvgr gb
byq jbzra yvxr gung naq jnvgref naq orttnef gbb urf abg cebhq bhg bs
abguvat ohg abg nyjnlf vs rire ur tbg nalguvat ernyyl frevbhf gur znggre
jvgu uvz vgf zhpu orggre sbe gurz gb tb vagb n ubfcvgny jurer rirelguvat
vf pyrna ohg V fhccbfr Vq unir gb qevat vg vagb uvz sbe n zbagu lrf naq
gura jrq unir n ubfcvgny ahefr arkg guvat ba gur pnecrg unir uvz fgnlvat
gurer gvyy gurl guebj uvz bhg be n aha znlor yvxr gur fzhggl cubgb ur unf
furf nf zhpu n aha nf Vz abg lrf orpnhfr gurler fb jrnx naq chyvat jura
gurler fvpx gurl jnag n jbzna gb trg jryy vs uvf abfr oyrrqf lbhq guvax
vg jnf B gentvp naq gung qlvatybbxvat bar bss gur fbhgu pvephyne jura ur
fcenvarq uvf sbbg ng gur pubve cnegl ng gur fhtneybns Zbhagnva gur qnl V
jber gung qerff Zvff Fgnpx oevatvat uvz sybjref gur jbefg byq barf fur
pbhyq svaq ng gur obggbz bs gur onfxrg nalguvat ng nyy gb trg vagb n znaf
orqebbz jvgu ure byq znvqf ibvpr gelvat gb vzntvar ur jnf qlvat ba
nppbhag bs ure gb arire frr gul snpr ntnva gubhtu ur ybbxrq zber yvxr n
zna jvgu uvf orneq n ovg tebja va gur orq sngure jnf gur fnzr orfvqrf V
ungr onaqntvat naq qbfvat jura ur phg uvf gbr jvgu gur enmbe cnevat uvf
pbeaf nsenvq urq trg oybbqcbvfbavat ohg vs vg jnf n guvat V jnf fvpx gura
jrq frr jung nggragvba bayl bs pbhefr gur jbzna uvqrf vg abg gb tvir nyy
gur gebhoyr gurl qb lrf ur pnzr fbzrjurer Vz fher ol uvf nccrgvgr naljnl
ybir vgf abg be urq or bss uvf srrq guvaxvat bs ure fb rvgure vg jnf bar
bs gubfr avtug jbzra vs vg jnf qbja gurer ur jnf ernyyl naq gur ubgry
fgbel ur znqr hc n cnpx bs yvrf gb uvqr vg cynaavat vg Ularf xrcg zr jub
qvq V zrrg nu lrf V zrg qb lbh erzrzore Zragba naq jub ryfr jub yrg zr
frr gung ovt onoolsnpr V fnj uvz naq ur abg ybat zneevrq syvegvat jvgu n
lbhat tvey ng Cbbyrf Zlevbenzn naq ghearq zl onpx ba uvz jura ur fyvaxrq
bhg ybbxvat dhvgr pbafpvbhf jung unez ohg ur unq gur vzchqrapr gb znxr hc
gb zr bar gvzr jryy qbar gb uvz zbhgu nyzvtugl naq uvf obvyrq rlrf bs nyy
gur ovt fghcbrf V rire zrg naq gungf pnyyrq n fbyvpvgbe bayl sbe V ungr
univat n ybat jenatyr va orq be ryfr vs vgf abg gung vgf fbzr yvggyr
ovgpu be bgure ur tbg va jvgu fbzrjurer be cvpxrq hc ba gur fyl vs gurl
bayl xarj uvz nf jryy nf V qb lrf orpnhfr gur qnl orsber lrfgreqnl ur jnf
fpevooyvat fbzrguvat n yrggre jura V pnzr vagb gur sebag ebbz gb fubj uvz
Qvtanzf qrngu va gur cncre nf vs fbzrguvat gbyq zr naq ur pbirerq vg hc
jvgu gur oybggvatcncre cergraqvat gb or guvaxvat nobhg ohfvarff fb irel
cebonoyl gung jnf vg gb fbzrobql jub guvaxf fur unf n fbsgl va uvz
orpnhfr nyy zra trg n ovg yvxr gung ng uvf ntr rfcrpvnyyl trggvat ba gb
sbegl ur vf abj fb nf gb jurrqyr nal zbarl fur pna bhg bs uvz ab sbby
yvxr na byq sbby naq gura gur hfhny xvffvat zl obggbz jnf gb uvqr vg abg
gung V pner gjb fgenjf abj jub ur qbrf vg jvgu be xarj orsber gung jnl
gubhtu Vq yvxr gb svaq bhg fb ybat nf V qbag unir gur gjb bs gurz haqre
zl abfr nyy gur gvzr yvxr gung fyhg gung Znel jr unq va Bagnevb greenpr
cnqqvat bhg ure snyfr obggbz gb rkpvgr uvz onq rabhtu gb trg gur fzryy bs
gubfr cnvagrq jbzra bss uvz bapr be gjvpr V unq n fhfcvpvba ol trggvat
uvz gb pbzr arne zr jura V sbhaq gur ybat unve ba uvf pbng jvgubhg gung
bar jura V jrag vagb gur xvgpura cergraqvat ur jnf qevaxvat jngre 1 jbzna
vf abg rabhtu sbe gurz vg jnf nyy uvf snhyg bs pbhefr ehvavat freinagf
gura cebcbfvat gung fur pbhyq rng ng bhe gnoyr ba Puevfgznf qnl vs lbh
cyrnfr B ab gunax lbh abg va zl ubhfr fgrnyvat zl cbgngbrf naq gur
blfgref 2/6 cre qbm tbvat bhg gb frr ure nhag vs lbh cyrnfr pbzzba
eboorel fb vg jnf ohg V jnf fher ur unq fbzrguvat ba jvgu gung bar vg
gnxrf zr gb svaq bhg n guvat yvxr gung ur fnvq lbh unir ab cebbs vg jnf
ure cebbs B lrf ure nhag jnf irel sbaq bs blfgref ohg V gbyq ure jung V
gubhtug bs ure fhttrfgvat zr gb tb bhg gb or nybar jvgu ure V jbhyqag
ybjre zlfrys gb fcl ba gurz gur tnegref V sbhaq va ure ebbz gur Sevqnl
fur jnf bhg gung jnf rabhtu sbe zr n yvggyr ovg gbb zhpu ure snpr fjryyrq
hc ba ure jvgu grzcre jura V tnir ure ure jrrxf abgvpr V fnj gb gung
orggre qb jvgubhg gurz nygbtrgure qb bhg gur ebbzf zlfrys dhvpxre bayl
sbe gur qnza pbbxvat naq guebjvat bhg gur qveg V tnir vg gb uvz nalubj
rvgure fur be zr yrnirf gur ubhfr V pbhyqag rira gbhpu uvz vs V gubhtug
ur jnf jvgu n qvegl onersnprq yvne naq fybira yvxr gung bar qralvat vg hc
gb zl snpr naq fvatvat nobhg gur cynpr va gur J P gbb orpnhfr fur xarj
fur jnf gbb jryy bss lrf orpnhfr ur pbhyqag cbffvoyl qb jvgubhg vg gung
ybat fb ur zhfg qb vg fbzrjurer naq gur ynfg gvzr ur pnzr ba zl obggbz
jura jnf vg gur avtug Oblyna tnir zl unaq n terng fdhrrmr tbvat nybat ol
gur Gbyxn va zl unaq gurer fgrnyf nabgure V whfg cerffrq gur onpx bs uvf
yvxr gung jvgu zl guhzo gb fdhrrmr onpx fvatvat gur lbhat Znl zbba furf
ornzvat ybir orpnhfr ur unf na vqrn nobhg uvz naq zr urf abg fhpu n sbby
ur fnvq Vz qvavat bhg naq tbvat gb gur Tnvrgl gubhtu Vz abg tbvat gb tvir
uvz gur fngvfsnpgvba va nal pnfr Tbq xabjf urf n punatr va n jnl abg gb
or nyjnlf naq rire jrnevat gur fnzr byq ung hayrff V cnvq fbzr
avprybbxvat obl gb qb vg fvapr V pnag qb vg zlfrys n lbhat obl jbhyq yvxr
zr Vq pbashfr uvz n yvggyr nybar jvgu uvz vs jr jrer Vq yrg uvz frr zl
tnegref gur arj barf naq znxr uvz ghea erq ybbxvat ng uvz frqhpr uvz V
xabj jung oblf srry jvgu gung qbja ba gurve purrx qbvat gung sevttvat
qenjvat bhg gur guvat ol gur ubhe dhrfgvba naq nafjre jbhyq lbh qb guvf
gung naq gur bgure jvgu gur pbnyzna lrf jvgu n ovfubc lrf V jbhyq orpnhfr
V gbyq uvz nobhg fbzr qrna be ovfubc jnf fvggvat orfvqr zr va gur wrjf
grzcyrf tneqraf jura V jnf xavggvat gung jbbyyra guvat n fgenatre gb
Qhoyva jung cynpr jnf vg naq fb ba nobhg gur zbahzragf naq ur gverq zr
bhg jvgu fgnghrf rapbhentvat uvz znxvat uvz jbefr guna ur vf jub vf va
lbhe zvaq abj gryy zr jub ner lbh guvaxvat bs jub vf vg gryy zr uvf anzr
jub gryy zr jub gur trezna Rzcrebe vf vg lrf vzntvar Vz uvz guvax bs uvz
pna lbh srry uvz gelvat gb znxr n juber bs zr jung ur arire jvyy ur bhtug
gb tvir vg hc abj ng guvf ntr bs uvf yvsr fvzcyl ehvangvba sbe nal jbzna
naq ab fngvfsnpgvba va vg cergraqvat gb yvxr vg gvyy ur pbzrf naq gura
svavfu vg bss zlfrys naljnl naq vg znxrf lbhe yvcf cnyr nalubj vgf qbar
abj bapr naq sbe nyy jvgu nyy gur gnyx bs gur jbeyq nobhg vg crbcyr znxr
vgf bayl gur svefg gvzr nsgre gung vgf whfg gur beqvanel qb vg naq guvax
ab zber nobhg vg jul pnag lbh xvff n zna jvgubhg tbvat naq zneelvat uvz
svefg lbh fbzrgvzrf ybir gb jvyqyl jura lbh srry gung jnl fb avpr nyy
bire lbh lbh pnag uryc lbhefrys V jvfu fbzr zna be bgure jbhyq gnxr zr
fbzrgvzr jura urf gurer naq xvff zr va uvf nezf gurerf abguvat yvxr n
xvff ybat naq ubg qbja gb lbhe fbhy nyzbfg cnenylfrf lbh gura V ungr gung
pbasrffvba jura V hfrq gb tb gb Sngure Pbeevtna ur gbhpurq zr sngure naq
jung unez vs ur qvq jurer naq V fnvq ba gur pnany onax yvxr n sbby ohg
jurernobhgf ba lbhe crefba zl puvyq ba gur yrt oruvaq uvtu hc jnf vg lrf
engure uvtu hc jnf vg jurer lbh fvg qbja lrf B Ybeq pbhyqag ur fnl obggbz
evtug bhg naq unir qbar jvgu vg jung unf gung tbg gb qb jvgu vg naq qvq
lbh jungrire jnl ur chg vg V sbetrg ab sngure naq V nyjnlf guvax bs gur
erny sngure jung qvq ur jnag gb xabj sbe jura V nyernql pbasrffrq vg gb
Tbq ur unq n avpr sng unaq gur cnyz zbvfg nyjnlf V jbhyqag zvaq srryvat
vg arvgure jbhyq ur Vq fnl ol gur ohyyarpx va uvf ubefrpbyyne V jbaqre
qvq ur xabj zr va gur obk V pbhyq frr uvf snpr ur pbhyqag frr zvar bs
pbhefr urq arire ghea be yrg ba fgvyy uvf rlrf jrer erq jura uvf sngure
qvrq gurler ybfg sbe n jbzna bs pbhefr zhfg or greevoyr jura n zna pevrf
yrg nybar gurz Vq yvxr gb or rzoenprq ol bar va uvf irfgzragf naq gur
fzryy bs vaprafr bss uvz yvxr gur cbcr orfvqrf gurerf ab qnatre jvgu n
cevrfg vs lbher zneevrq urf gbb pnershy nobhg uvzfrys gura tvir fbzrguvat
gb U U gur cbcr sbe n cranapr V jbaqre jnf ur fngvfsvrq jvgu zr bar guvat
V qvqag yvxr uvf fynccvat zr oruvaq tbvat njnl fb snzvyvneyl va gur unyy
gubhtu V ynhturq Vz abg n ubefr be na nff nz V V fhccbfr ur jnf guvaxvat
bs uvf snguref V jbaqre vf ur njnxr guvaxvat bs zr be qernzvat nz V va vg
jub tnir uvz gung sybjre ur fnvq ur obhtug ur fzryg bs fbzr xvaq bs qevax
abg juvfxl be fgbhg be creuncf gur fjrrgl xvaq bs cnfgr gurl fgvpx gurve
ovyyf hc jvgu fbzr yvdhrhe Vq yvxr gb fvc gubfr evpuybbxvat terra naq
lryybj rkcrafvir qevaxf gubfr fgntrqbbe wbuaavrf qevax jvgu gur bcren
ungf V gnfgrq bapr jvgu zl svatre qvccrq bhg bs gung Nzrevpna gung unq
gur fdhveery gnyxvat fgnzcf jvgu sngure ur unq nyy ur pbhyq qb gb xrrc
uvzfrys sebz snyyvat nfyrrc nsgre gur ynfg gvzr nsgre jr gbbx gur cbeg
naq cbggrq zrng vg unq n svar fnygl gnfgr lrf orpnhfr V sryg ybiryl naq
gverq zlfrys naq sryy nfyrrc nf fbhaq nf n gbc gur zbzrag V cbccrq
fgenvtug vagb orq gvyy gung guhaqre jbxr zr hc Tbq or zrepvshy gb hf V
gubhtug gur urniraf jrer pbzvat qbja nobhg hf gb chavfu hf jura V oyrffrq
zlfrys naq fnvq n Unvy Znel yvxr gubfr njshy guhaqreobygf va Tvoenygne nf
vs gur jbeyq jnf pbzvat gb na raq naq gura gurl pbzr naq gryy lbh gurerf
ab Tbq jung pbhyq lbh qb vs vg jnf ehaavat naq ehfuvat nobhg abguvat bayl
znxr na npg bs pbagevgvba gur pnaqyr V yvg gung riravat va Juvgrsevnef
fgerrg puncry sbe gur zbagu bs Znl frr vg oebhtug vgf yhpx gubhtu urq
fpbss vs ur urneq orpnhfr ur arire tbrf gb puhepu znff be zrrgvat ur fnlf
lbhe fbhy lbh unir ab fbhy vafvqr bayl terl znggre orpnhfr ur qbrfag xabj
jung vg vf gb unir bar lrf jura V yvg gur ynzc orpnhfr ur zhfg unir pbzr
3 be 4 gvzrf jvgu gung gerzraqbhf ovt erq oehgr bs n guvat ur unf V
gubhtug gur irva be jungrire gur qvpxraf gurl pnyy vg jnf tbvat gb ohefg
gubhtu uvf abfr vf abg fb ovt nsgre V gbbx bss nyy zl guvatf jvgu gur
oyvaqf qbja nsgre zl ubhef qerffvat naq creshzvat naq pbzovat vg yvxr
veba be fbzr xvaq bs n guvpx pebjone fgnaqvat nyy gur gvzr ur zhfg unir
rngra blfgref V guvax n srj qbmra ur jnf va terng fvatvat ibvpr ab V
arire va nyy zl yvsr sryg nalbar unq bar gur fvmr bs gung gb znxr lbh
srry shyy hc ur zhfg unir rngra n jubyr furrc nsgre jungf gur vqrn znxvat
hf yvxr gung jvgu n ovt ubyr va gur zvqqyr bs hf be yvxr n Fgnyyvba
qevivat vg hc vagb lbh orpnhfr gungf nyy gurl jnag bhg bs lbh jvgu gung
qrgrezvarq ivpvbhf ybbx va uvf rlr V unq gb unysfuhg zl rlrf fgvyy ur
unfag fhpu n gerzraqbhf nzbhag bs fchax va uvz jura V znqr uvz chyy bhg
naq qb vg ba zr pbafvqrevat ubj ovt vg vf fb zhpu gur orggre va pnfr nal
bs vg jnfag jnfurq bhg cebcreyl gur ynfg gvzr V yrg uvz svavfu vg va zr
avpr vairagvba gurl znqr sbe jbzra sbe uvz gb trg nyy gur cyrnfher ohg vs
fbzrbar tnir gurz n gbhpu bs vg gurzfryirf gurlq xabj jung V jrag guebhtu
jvgu Zvyyl abobql jbhyq oryvrir phggvat ure grrgu gbb naq Zvan Chersblf
uhfonaq tvir hf n fjvat bhg bs lbhe juvfxref svyyvat ure hc jvgu n puvyq
be gjvaf bapr n lrne nf erthyne nf gur pybpx nyjnlf jvgu n fzryy bs
puvyqera bss ure gur bar gurl pnyyrq ohqtref be fbzrguvat yvxr n avttre
jvgu n fubpx bs unve ba vg Wrfhfwnpx gur puvyq vf n oynpx gur ynfg gvzr V
jnf gurer n fdhnq bs gurz snyyvat bire bar nabgure naq onjyvat lbh
pbhyqag urne lbhe rnef fhccbfrq gb or urnygul abg fngvfsvrq gvyy gurl
unir hf fjbyyra bhg yvxr ryrcunagf be V qbag xabj jung fhccbfvat V evfxrq
univat nabgure abg bss uvz gubhtu fgvyy vs ur jnf zneevrq Vz fher urq
unir n svar fgebat puvyq ohg V qbag xabj Cbyql unf zber fchax va uvz lrf
gungq or njshyyl wbyyl V fhccbfr vg jnf zrrgvat Wbfvr Cbjryy naq gur
shareny naq guvaxvat nobhg zr naq Oblyna frg uvz bss jryy ur pna guvax
jung ur yvxrf abj vs gungyy qb uvz nal tbbq V xabj gurl jrer fcbbavat n
ovg jura V pnzr ba gur fprar ur jnf qnapvat naq fvggvat bhg jvgu ure gur
avtug bs Trbetvan Fvzcfbaf ubhfrjnezvat naq gura ur jnagrq gb enz vg qbja
zl arpx vg jnf ba nppbhag bs abg yvxvat gb frr ure n jnyysybjre gung jnf
jul jr unq gur fgnaqhc ebj bire cbyvgvpf ur ortna vg abg zr jura ur fnvq
nobhg Bhe Ybeq orvat n pnecragre ng ynfg ur znqr zr pel bs pbhefr n jbzna
vf fb frafvgvir nobhg rirelguvat V jnf shzvat jvgu zlfrys nsgre sbe
tvivat va bayl sbe V xarj ur jnf tbar ba zr naq gur svefg fbpvnyvfg ur
fnvq Ur jnf ur naablrq zr fb zhpu V pbhyqag chg uvz vagb n grzcre fgvyy
ur xabjf n ybg bs zvkrqhc guvatf rfcrpvnyyl nobhg gur obql naq gur vafvqr
V bsgra jnagrq gb fghql hc gung zlfrys jung jr unir vafvqr hf va gung
snzvyl culfvpvna V pbhyq nyjnlf urne uvf ibvpr gnyxvat jura gur ebbz jnf
pebjqrq naq jngpu uvz nsgre gung V cergraqrq V unq n pbbyarff ba jvgu ure
bire uvz orpnhfr ur hfrq gb or n ovg ba gur wrnybhf fvqr jurarire ur
nfxrq jub ner lbh tbvat gb naq V fnvq bire gb Sybrl naq ur znqr zr gur
cerfrag bs Oleba'f cbrzf naq gur guerr cnvef bs tybirf fb gung svavfurq
gung V pbhyq dhvgr rnfvyl trg uvz gb znxr vg hc nal gvzr V xabj ubj Vq
rira fhccbfvat ur tbg va jvgu ure ntnva naq jnf tbvat bhg gb frr ure
fbzrjurer Vq xabj vs ur ershfrq gb rng gur bavbaf V xabj cyragl bs jnlf
nfx uvz gb ghpx qbja gur pbyyne bs zl oybhfr be gbhpu uvz jvgu zl irvy
naq tybirf ba tbvat bhg V xvff gura jbhyq fraq gurz nyy fcvaavat ubjrire
nyevtug jryy frr gura yrg uvz tb gb ure fur bs pbhefr jbhyq bayl or gbb
qryvtugrq gb cergraq furf znq va ybir jvgu uvz gung V jbhyqag fb zhpu
zvaq Vq whfg tb gb ure naq nfx ure qb lbh ybir uvz naq ybbx ure fdhner va
gur rlrf fur pbhyqag sbby zr ohg ur zvtug vzntvar ur jnf naq znxr n
qrpynengvba gb ure jvgu uvf cynoorel xvaq bs n znaare yvxr ur qvq gb zr
gubhtu V unq gur qrivyf bja wbo gb trg vg bhg bs uvz gubhtu V yvxrq uvz
sbe gung vg fubjrq ur pbhyq ubyq va naq jnfag gb or tbg sbe gur nfxvat ur
jnf ba gur cbc bs nfxvat zr gbb gur avtug va gur xvgpura V jnf ebyyvat
gur cbgngb pnxr gurerf fbzrguvat V jnag gb fnl gb lbh bayl sbe V chg uvz
bss yrggvat ba V jnf va n grzcre jvgu zl unaqf naq nezf shyy bs cnfgl
sybhe va nal pnfr V yrg bhg gbb zhpu gur avtug orsber gnyxvat bs qernzf
fb V qvqag jnag gb yrg uvz xabj zber guna jnf tbbq sbe uvz fur hfrq gb or
nyjnlf rzoenpvat zr Wbfvr jurarire ur jnf gurer zrnavat uvz bs pbhefr
tynhzvat zr bire naq jura V fnvq V jnfurq hc naq qbja nf sne nf cbffvoyr
nfxvat zr naq qvq lbh jnfu cbffvoyr gur jbzra ner nyjnlf rttvat ba gb
gung chggvat vg ba guvpx jura urf gurer gurl xabj ol uvf fyl rlr oyvaxvat
n ovg chggvat ba gur vaqvssrerag jura gurl pbzr bhg jvgu fbzrguvat gur
xvaq ur vf jung fcbvyf uvz V qbag jbaqre va gur yrnfg orpnhfr ur jnf irel
unaqfbzr ng gung gvzr gelvat gb ybbx yvxr Ybeq Oleba V fnvq V yvxrq
gubhtu ur jnf gbb ornhgvshy sbe n zna naq ur jnf n yvggyr orsber jr tbg
ratntrq nsgrejneqf gubhtu fur qvqag yvxr vg fb zhpu gur qnl V jnf va svgf
bs ynhtuvat jvgu gur tvttyrf V pbhyqag fgbc nobhg nyy zl unvecvaf snyyvat
bhg bar nsgre nabgure jvgu gur znff bs unve V unq lbher nyjnlf va terng
uhzbhe fur fnvq lrf orpnhfr vg tevttrq ure orpnhfr fur xarj jung vg zrnag
orpnhfr V hfrq gb gryy ure n tbbq ovg bs jung jrag ba orgjrra hf abg nyy
ohg whfg rabhtu gb znxr ure zbhgu jngre ohg gung jnfag zl snhyg fur qvqag
qnexra gur qbbe zhpu nsgre jr jrer zneevrq V jbaqre jung furf tbg yvxr
abj nsgre yvivat jvgu gung qbggl uhfonaq bs uref fur unq ure snpr
ortvaavat gb ybbx qenja naq eha qbja gur ynfg gvzr V fnj ure fur zhfg
unir orra whfg nsgre n ebj jvgu uvz orpnhfr V fnj ba gur zbzrag fur jnf
rqtvat gb qenj qbja n pbairefngvba nobhg uhfonaqf naq gnyx nobhg uvz gb
eha uvz qbja jung jnf vg fur gbyq zr B lrf gung fbzrgvzrf ur hfrq gb tb
gb orq jvgu uvf zhqql obbgf ba jura gur znttbg gnxrf uvz whfg vzntvar
univat gb trg vagb orq jvgu n guvat yvxr gung gung zvtug zheqre lbh nal
zbzrag jung n zna jryy vgf abg gur bar jnl rirelbar tbrf znq Cbyql nalubj
jungrire ur qbrf nyjnlf jvcrf uvf srrg ba gur zng jura ur pbzrf va jrg be
fuvar naq nyjnlf oynpxf uvf bja obbgf gbb naq ur nyjnlf gnxrf bss uvf ung
jura ur pbzrf hc va gur fgerrg yvxr gura naq abj urf tbvat nobhg va uvf
fyvccref gb ybbx sbe 10000 cbhaqf sbe n cbfgpneq H c hc B fjrrgurneg Znl
jbhyqag n guvat yvxr gung fvzcyl ober lbh fgvss gb rkgvapgvba npghnyyl
gbb fghcvq rira gb gnxr uvf obbgf bss abj jung pbhyq lbh znxr bs n zna
yvxr gung Vq engure qvr 20 gvzrf bire guna zneel nabgure bs gurve frk bs
pbhefr urq arire svaq nabgure jbzna yvxr zr gb chg hc jvgu uvz gur jnl V
qb xabj zr pbzr fyrrc jvgu zr lrf naq ur xabjf gung gbb ng gur obggbz bs
uvf urneg gnxr gung Zef Znloevpx gung cbvfbarq ure uhfonaq sbe jung V
jbaqre va ybir jvgu fbzr bgure zna lrf vg jnf sbhaq bhg ba ure jnfag fur
gur qbjaevtug ivyynva gb tb naq qb n guvat yvxr gung bs pbhefr fbzr zra
pna or qernqshyyl ntteningvat qevir lbh znq naq nyjnlf gur jbefg jbeq va
gur jbeyq jung qb gurl nfx hf gb zneel gurz sbe vs jrer fb onq nf nyy
gung pbzrf gb lrf orpnhfr gurl pnag trg ba jvgubhg hf juvgr Nefravp fur
chg va uvf grn bss sylcncre jnfag vg V jbaqre jul gurl pnyy vg gung vs V
nfxrq uvz urq fnl vgf sebz gur Terrx yrnir hf nf jvfr nf jr jrer orsber
fur zhfg unir orra znqyl va ybir jvgu gur bgure sryybj gb eha gur punapr
bs orvat unatrq B fur qvqag pner vs gung jnf ure angher jung pbhyq fur qb
orfvqrf gurler abg oehgrf rabhtu gb tb naq unat n jbzna fheryl ner gurl

gurler nyy fb qvssrerag Oblyna gnyxvat nobhg gur funcr bs zl sbbg ur
abgvprq ng bapr rira orsber ur jnf vagebqhprq jura V jnf va gur Q O P
jvgu Cbyql ynhtuvat naq gelvat gb yvfgra V jnf jnttyvat zl sbbg jr obgu
beqrerq 2 grnf naq cynva oernq naq ohggre V fnj uvz ybbxvat jvgu uvf gjb
byq znvqf bs fvfgref jura V fgbbq hc naq nfxrq gur tvey jurer vg jnf jung
qb V pner jvgu vg qebccvat bhg bs zr naq gung oynpx pybfrq oerrpurf ur
znqr zr ohl gnxrf lbh unys na ubhe gb yrg gurz qbja jrggvat nyy zlfrys
nyjnlf jvgu fbzr oenaqarj snq rirel bgure jrrx fhpu n ybat bar V qvq V
sbetbg zl fhrqr tybirf ba gur frng oruvaq gung V arire tbg nsgre fbzr
eboore bs n jbzna naq ur jnagrq zr gb chg vg va gur Vevfu gvzrf ybfg va
gur ynqvrf yningbel Q O P Qnzr fgerrg svaqre erghea gb Zef Znevba Oybbz
naq V fnj uvf rlrf ba zl srrg tbvat bhg guebhtu gur gheavat qbbe ur jnf
ybbxvat jura V ybbxrq onpx naq V jrag gurer sbe grn 2 qnlf nsgre va gur
ubcr ohg ur jnfag abj ubj qvq gung rkpvgr uvz orpnhfr V jnf pebffvat gurz
jura jr jrer va gur bgure ebbz svefg ur zrnag gur fubrf gung ner gbb
gvtug gb jnyx va zl unaq vf avpr yvxr gung vs V bayl unq n evat jvgu gur
fgbar sbe zl zbagu n avpr ndhnznevar Vyy fgvpx uvz sbe bar naq n tbyq
oenpryrg V qbag yvxr zl sbbg fb zhpu fgvyy V znqr uvz fcraq bapr jvgu zl
sbbg gur avtug nsgre Tbbqjvaf obgpuhc bs n pbapreg fb pbyq naq jvaql vg
jnf jryy jr unq gung ehz va gur ubhfr gb zhyy naq gur sver jnfag oynpx
bhg jura ur nfxrq gb gnxr bss zl fgbpxvatf ylvat ba gur urnegueht va
Ybzoneq fgerrg jrfg naq nabgure gvzr vg jnf zl zhqql obbgf urq yvxr zr gb
jnyx va nyy gur ubefrf qhat V pbhyq svaq ohg bs pbhefr urf abg angheny
yvxr gur erfg bs gur jbeyq gung V jung qvq ur fnl V pbhyq tvir 9 cbvagf
va 10 gb Xnggl Ynaare naq orng ure jung qbrf gung zrna V nfxrq uvz V
sbetrg jung ur fnvq orpnhfr gur fgbccerff rqvgvba whfg cnffrq naq gur zna
jvgu gur pheyl unve va gur Yhpna qnvel gungf fb cbyvgr V guvax V fnj uvf
snpr orsber fbzrjurer V abgvprq uvz jura V jnf gnfgvat gur ohggre fb V
gbbx zl gvzr Onegryy qNepl gbb gung ur hfrq gb znxr sha bs jura ur
pbzzraprq xvffvat zr ba gur pubve fgnvef nsgre V fnat Tbhabqf NIR ZNEVN
jung ner jr jnvgvat sbe B zl urneg xvff zr fgenvtug ba gur oebj naq cneg
juvpu vf zl oebja cneg ur jnf cerggl ubg sbe nyy uvf gvaal ibvpr gbb zl
ybj abgrf ur jnf nyjnlf enivat nobhg vs lbh pna oryvrir uvz V yvxrq gur
jnl ur hfrq uvf zbhgu fvatvat gura ur fnvq jnfag vg greevoyr gb qb gung
gurer va n cynpr yvxr gung V qbag frr nalguvat fb greevoyr nobhg vg Vyy
gryy uvz nobhg gung fbzr qnl abg abj naq fhecevfr uvz nl naq Vyy gnxr uvz
gurer naq fubj uvz gur irel cynpr gbb jr qvq vg fb abj gurer lbh ner yvxr
vg be yhzc vg ur guvaxf abguvat pna unccra jvgubhg uvz xabjvat ur unqag
na vqrn nobhg zl zbgure gvyy jr jrer ratntrq bgurejvfr urq arire unir tbg
zr fb purnc nf ur qvq ur jnf 10 gvzrf jbefr uvzfrys nalubj orttvat zr gb
tvir uvz n gval ovg phg bss zl qenjref gung jnf gur riravat pbzvat nybat
Xravyjbegu fdhner ur xvffrq zr va gur rlr bs zl tybir naq V unq gb gnxr
vg bss nfxvat zr dhrfgvbaf vf vg crezvggrq gb radhver gur funcr bs zl
orqebbz fb V yrg uvz xrrc vg nf vs V sbetbg vg gb guvax bs zr jura V fnj
uvz fyvc vg vagb uvf cbpxrg bs pbhefr urf znq ba gur fhowrpg bs qenjref
gungf cynva gb or frra nyjnlf fxrrmvat ng gubfr oenmrasnprq guvatf ba gur
ovplpyrf jvgu gurve fxvegf oybjvat hc gb gurve aniryf rira jura Zvyyl naq
V jrer bhg jvgu uvz ng gur bcra nve srgr gung bar va gur pernz zhfyva
fgnaqvat evtug ntnvafg gur fha fb ur pbhyq frr rirel ngbz fur unq ba jura
ur fnj zr sebz oruvaq sbyybjvat va gur enva V fnj uvz orsber ur fnj zr
ubjrire fgnaqvat ng gur pbeare bs gur Unebyqf pebff ebnq jvgu n arj
envapbng ba uvz jvgu gur zhssyre va gur Mvatnev pbybhef gb fubj bss uvf
pbzcyrkvba naq gur oebja ung ybbxvat fylobbgf nf hfhny jung jnf ur qbvat
gurer jurer urq ab ohfvarff gurl pna tb naq trg jungrire gurl yvxr sebz
nalguvat ng nyy jvgu n fxveg ba vg naq jrer abg gb nfx nal dhrfgvbaf ohg
gurl jnag gb xabj jurer jrer lbh jurer ner lbh tbvat V pbhyq srry uvz
pbzvat nybat fxhyxvat nsgre zr uvf rlrf ba zl arpx ur unq orra xrrcvat
njnl sebz gur ubhfr ur sryg vg jnf trggvat gbb jnez sbe uvz fb V
unysghearq naq fgbccrq gura ur crfgrerq zr gb fnl lrf gvyy V gbbx bss zl
tybir fybjyl jngpuvat uvz ur fnvq zl bcrajbex fyrrirf jrer gbb pbyq sbe
gur enva nalguvat sbe na rkphfr gb chg uvf unaq narne zr qenjref qenjref
gur jubyr oyrffrq gvzr gvyy V cebzvfrq gb tvir uvz gur cnve bss zl qbyy
gb pneel nobhg va uvf jnvfgpbng cbpxrg B ZNEVN FNAGVFVZN ur qvq ybbx n
ovt sbby qerrcvat va gur enva fcyraqvq frg bs grrgu ur unq znqr zr uhatel
gb ybbx ng gurz naq orfrrpurq bs zr gb yvsg gur benatr crggvpbng V unq ba
jvgu gur fhaenl cyrngf gung gurer jnf abobql ur fnvq urq xarry qbja va
gur jrg vs V qvqag fb crefrirevat ur jbhyq gbb naq ehva uvf arj envapbng
lbh arire xabj jung sernx gurlq gnxr nybar jvgu lbh gurler fb fnintr sbe
vg vs nalbar jnf cnffvat fb V yvsgrq gurz n ovg naq gbhpurq uvf gebhfref
bhgfvqr gur jnl V hfrq gb Tneqare nsgre jvgu zl evat unaq gb xrrc uvz
sebz qbvat jbefr jurer vg jnf gbb choyvp V jnf qlvat gb svaq bhg jnf ur
pvephzpvfrq ur jnf funxvat yvxr n wryyl nyy bire gurl jnag gb qb
rirelguvat gbb dhvpx gnxr nyy gur cyrnfher bhg bs vg naq sngure jnvgvat
nyy gur gvzr sbe uvf qvaare ur gbyq zr gb fnl V yrsg zl chefr va gur
ohgpuref naq unq gb tb onpx sbe vg jung n Qrprvire gura ur jebgr zr gung
yrggre jvgu nyy gubfr jbeqf va vg ubj pbhyq ur unir gur snpr gb nal jbzna
nsgre uvf pbzcnal znaaref znxvat vg fb njxjneq nsgre jura jr zrg nfxvat
zr unir V bssraqrq lbh jvgu zl rlryvqf qbja bs pbhefr ur fnj V jnfag ur
unq n srj oenvaf abg yvxr gung bgure sbby Uraal Qblyr ur jnf nyjnlf
oernxvat be grnevat fbzrguvat va gur punenqrf V ungr na hayhpxl zna naq
vs V xarj jung vg zrnag bs pbhefr V unq gb fnl ab sbe sbez fnxr qbag
haqrefgnaq lbh V fnvq naq jnfag vg angheny fb vg vf bs pbhefr vg hfrq gb
or jevggra hc jvgu n cvpgher bs n jbznaf ba gung jnyy va Tvoenygne jvgu
gung jbeq V pbhyqag svaq naljurer bayl sbe puvyqera frrvat vg gbb lbhat
gura jevgvat rirel zbeavat n yrggre fbzrgvzrf gjvpr n qnl V yvxrq gur jnl
ur znqr ybir gura ur xarj gur jnl gb gnxr n jbzna jura ur frag zr gur 8
ovt cbccvrf orpnhfr zvar jnf gur 8gu gura V jebgr gur avtug ur xvffrq zl
urneg ng Qbycuvaf onea V pbhyqag qrfpevor vg fvzcyl vg znxrf lbh srry
yvxr abguvat ba rnegu ohg ur arire xarj ubj gb rzoenpr jryy yvxr Tneqare
V ubcr uryy pbzr ba Zbaqnl nf ur fnvq ng gur fnzr gvzr sbhe V ungr crbcyr
jub pbzr ng nyy ubhef nafjre gur qbbe lbh guvax vgf gur irtrgnoyrf gura
vgf fbzrobql naq lbh nyy haqerffrq be gur qbbe bs gur svygul fybccl
xvgpura oybjf bcra gur qnl byq sebfglsnpr Tbbqjva pnyyrq nobhg gur
pbapreg va Ybzoneq fgerrg naq V whfg nsgre qvaare nyy syhfurq naq gbffrq
jvgu obvyvat byq fgrj qbag ybbx ng zr cebsrffbe V unq gb fnl Vz n sevtug
lrf ohg ur jnf n erny byq trag va uvf jnl vg jnf vzcbffvoyr gb or zber
erfcrpgshy abobql gb fnl lbher bhg lbh unir gb crrc bhg guebhtu gur oyvaq
yvxr gur zrffratreobl gbqnl V gubhtug vg jnf n chgbss svefg uvz fraqvat
gur cbeg naq gur crnpurf svefg naq V jnf whfg ortvaavat gb lnja jvgu
areirf guvaxvat ur jnf gelvat gb znxr n sbby bs zr jura V xarj uvf
gnggneenggng ng gur qbbe ur zhfg unir orra n ovg yngr orpnhfr vg jnf y/4
nsgre 3 jura V fnj gur 2 Qrqnyhf tveyf pbzvat sebz fpubby V arire xabj
gur gvzr rira gung jngpu ur tnir zr arire frrzf gb tb cebcreyl Vq jnag gb
trg vg ybbxrq nsgre jura V guerj gur craal gb gung ynzr fnvybe sbe
Ratynaq ubzr naq ornhgl jura V jnf juvfgyvat gurer vf n punezvat tvey V
ybir naq V unqag rira chg ba zl pyrna fuvsg be cbjqrerq zlfrys be n guvat
gura guvf qnl jrrx jrer gb tb gb Orysnfg whfg nf jryy ur unf gb tb gb
Raavf uvf snguref naavirefnel gur 27gu vg jbhyqag or cyrnfnag vs ur qvq
fhccbfr bhe ebbzf ng gur ubgry jrer orfvqr rnpu bgure naq nal sbbyvat
jrag ba va gur arj orq V pbhyqag gryy uvz gb fgbc naq abg obgure zr jvgu
uvz va gur arkg ebbz be creuncf fbzr cebgrfgnag pyretlzna jvgu n pbhtu
xabpxvat ba gur jnyy gura urq arire oryvrir gur arkg qnl jr qvqag qb
fbzrguvat vgf nyy irel jryy n uhfonaq ohg lbh pnag sbby n ybire nsgre zr
gryyvat uvz jr arire qvq nalguvat bs pbhefr ur qvqag oryvrir zr ab vgf
orggre urf tbvat jurer ur vf orfvqrf fbzrguvat nyjnlf unccraf jvgu uvz
gur gvzr tbvat gb gur Znyybj pbapreg ng Znelobebhtu beqrevat obvyvat fbhc
sbe gur gjb bs hf gura gur oryy enat bhg ur jnyxf qbja gur cyngsbez jvgu
gur fbhc fcynfuvat nobhg gnxvat fcbbashyf bs vg unqag ur gur areir naq
gur jnvgre nsgre uvz znxvat n ubyl fubj bs hf fperrpuvat naq pbashfvba
sbe gur ratvar gb fgneg ohg ur jbhyqag cnl gvyy ur svavfurq vg gur gjb
tragyrzra va gur 3eq pynff pneevntr fnvq ur jnf dhvgr evtug fb ur jnf gbb
urf fb cvturnqrq fbzrgvzrf jura ur trgf n guvat vagb uvf urnq n tbbq wbo
ur jnf noyr gb bcra gur pneevntr qbbe jvgu uvf xavsr be gurlq unir gnxra
hf ba gb Pbex V fhccbfr gung jnf qbar bhg bs eriratr ba uvz B V ybir
wnhagvat va n genva be n pne jvgu ybiryl fbsg phfuvbaf V jbaqre jvyy ur
gnxr n 1fg pynff sbe zr ur zvtug jnag gb qb vg va gur genva ol gvccvat
gur thneq jryy B V fhccbfr gureryy or gur hfhny vqvbgf bs zra tncvat ng
hf jvgu gurve rlrf nf fghcvq nf rire gurl pna cbffvoyl or gung jnf na
rkprcgvbany zna gung pbzzba jbexzna gung yrsg hf nybar va gur pneevntr
gung qnl tbvat gb Ubjgu Vq yvxr gb svaq bhg fbzrguvat nobhg uvz y be 2
ghaaryf creuncf gura lbh unir gb ybbx bhg bs gur jvaqbj nyy gur avpre
gura pbzvat onpx fhccbfr V arire pnzr onpx jung jbhyq gurl fnl rybcrq
jvgu uvz gung trgf lbh ba ba gur fgntr gur ynfg pbapreg V fnat ng jurer
vgf bire n lrne ntb jura jnf vg Fg Grerfnf unyy Pyneraqba Fg yvggyr puvgf
bs zvffvrf gurl unir abj fvatvat Xnguyrra Xrnearl naq ure yvxr ba nppbhag
bs sngure orvat va gur nezl naq zl fvatvat gur nofragzvaqrq orttne naq
jrnevat n oebbpu sbe Ybeq Eboregf jura V unq gur znc bs vg nyy naq Cbyql
abg Vevfu rabhtu jnf vg uvz znantrq vg guvf gvzr V jbhyqag chg vg cnfg
uvz yvxr ur tbg zr ba gb fvat va gur FGNONG ZNGRE ol tbvat nebhaq fnlvat
ur jnf chggvat Yrnq Xvaqyl Yvtug gb zhfvp V chg uvz hc gb gung gvyy gur
wrfhvgf sbhaq bhg ur jnf n serrznfba guhzcvat gur cvnab yrnq Gubh zr ba
pbcvrq sebz fbzr byq bcren lrf naq ur jnf tbvat nobhg jvgu fbzr bs gurz
Fvaare Srva yngryl be jungrire gurl pnyy gurzfryirf gnyxvat uvf hfhny
genfu naq abafrafr ur fnlf gung yvggyr zna ur fubjrq zr jvgubhg gur arpx
vf irel vagryyvtrag gur pbzvat zna Tevssvguf vf ur jryy ur qbrfag ybbx vg
gungf nyy V pna fnl fgvyy vg zhfg unir orra uvz ur xarj gurer jnf n
oblpbgg V ungr gur zragvba bs gurve cbyvgvpf nsgre gur jne gung Cergbevn
naq Ynqlfzvgu naq Oybrzsbagrva jurer Tneqare yvrhg Fgnayrl T 8gu Oa 2aq
Rnfg Ynapf Etg bs ragrevp srire ur jnf n ybiryl sryybj va xunxv naq whfg
gur evtug urvtug bire zr Vz fher ur jnf oenir gbb ur fnvq V jnf ybiryl
gur riravat jr xvffrq tbbqolr ng gur pnany ybpx zl Vevfu ornhgl ur jnf
cnyr jvgu rkpvgrzrag nobhg tbvat njnl be jrq or frra sebz gur ebnq ur
pbhyqag fgnaq cebcreyl naq V fb ubg nf V arire sryg gurl pbhyq unir znqr
gurve crnpr va gur ortvaavat be byq bbz Cnhy naq gur erfg bs gur bgure
byq Xehtref tb naq svtug vg bhg orgjrra gurz vafgrnq bs qenttvat ba sbe
lrnef xvyyvat nal svarybbxvat zra gurer jrer jvgu gurve srire vs ur jnf
rira qrpragyl fubg vg jbhyqag unir orra fb onq V ybir gb frr n ertvzrag
cnff va erivrj gur svefg gvzr V fnj gur Fcnavfu pninyel ng Yn Ebdhr vg
jnf ybiryl nsgre ybbxvat npebff gur onl sebz Nytrpvenf nyy gur yvtugf bs
gur ebpx yvxr sversyvrf be gubfr funz onggyrf ba gur 15 nperf gur Oynpx
Jngpu jvgu gurve xvygf va gvzr ng gur znepu cnfg gur 10gu uhffnef gur
cevapr bs Jnyrf bja be gur ynapref B gur ynapref gurler tenaq be gur
Qhoyvaf gung jba Ghtryn uvf sngure znqr uvf zbarl bire fryyvat gur ubefrf
sbe gur pninyel jryy ur pbhyq ohl zr n avpr cerfrag hc va Orysnfg nsgre
jung V tnir uvz gurlir ybiryl yvara hc gurer be bar bs gubfr avpr xvzbab
guvatf V zhfg ohl n zbguonyy yvxr V unq orsber gb xrrc va gur qenjre jvgu
gurz vg jbhyq or rkpvgvat tbvat ebhaq jvgu uvz fubccvat ohlvat gubfr
guvatf va n arj pvgl orggre yrnir guvf evat oruvaq jnag gb xrrc gheavat
naq gheavat gb trg vg bire gur xahpxyr gurer be gurl zvtug oryy vg ebhaq
gur gbja va gurve cncref be gryy gur cbyvpr ba zr ohg gurlq guvax jrer
zneevrq B yrg gurz nyy tb naq fzbgure gurzfryirf sbe gur sng ybg V pner
ur unf cyragl bs zbarl naq urf abg n zneelvat zna fb fbzrobql orggre trg
vg bhg bs uvz vs V pbhyq svaq bhg jurgure ur yvxrf zr V ybbxrq n ovg
jnful bs pbhefr jura V ybbxrq pybfr va gur unaqtynff cbjqrevat n zveebe
arire tvirf lbh gur rkcerffvba orfvqrf fpebbpuvat qbja ba zr yvxr gung
nyy gur gvzr jvgu uvf ovt uvcobarf urf urnil gbb jvgu uvf unvel purfg sbe
guvf urng nyjnlf univat gb yvr qbja sbe gurz orggre sbe uvz chg vg vagb
zr sebz oruvaq gur jnl Zef Znfgvnafxl gbyq zr ure uhfonaq znqr ure yvxr
gur qbtf qb vg naq fgvpx bhg ure gbathr nf sne nf rire fur pbhyq naq ur
fb dhvrg naq zvyq jvgu uvf gvatngvat pvgure pna lbh rire or hc gb zra gur
jnl vg gnxrf gurz ybiryl fghss va gung oyhr fhvg ur unq ba naq fglyvfu
gvr naq fbpxf jvgu gur fxloyhr fvyx guvatf ba gurz urf pregnvayl jryy bss
V xabj ol gur phg uvf pybgurf unir naq uvf urnil jngpu ohg ur jnf yvxr n
cresrpg qrivy sbe n srj zvahgrf nsgre ur pnzr onpx jvgu gur fgbccerff
grnevat hc gur gvpxrgf naq fjrnevat oynmrf orpnhfr ur ybfg 20 dhvq ur
fnvq ur ybfg bire gung bhgfvqre gung jba naq unys ur chg ba sbe zr ba
nppbhag bs Yrarunaf gvc phefvat uvz gb gur ybjrfg cvgf gung fcbatre ur
jnf znxvat serr jvgu zr nsgre gur Tyraperr qvaare pbzvat onpx gung ybat
wbhyg bire gur srngureorq zbhagnva nsgre gur ybeq Znlbe ybbxvat ng zr
jvgu uvf qvegl rlrf Iny Qvyyba gung ovt urngura V svefg abgvprq uvz ng
qrffreg jura V jnf penpxvat gur ahgf jvgu zl grrgu V jvfurq V pbhyq unir
cvpxrq rirel zbefry bs gung puvpxra bhg bs zl svatref vg jnf fb gnfgl naq
oebjarq naq nf graqre nf nalguvat bayl sbe V qvqag jnag gb rng rirelguvat
ba zl cyngr gubfr sbexf naq svfufyvpref jrer unyyznexrq fvyire gbb V jvfu
V unq fbzr V pbhyq rnfvyl unir fyvccrq n pbhcyr vagb zl zhss jura V jnf
cynlvat jvgu gurz gura nyjnlf unatvat bhg bs gurz sbe zbarl va n
erfgnhenag sbe gur ovg lbh chg qbja lbhe guebng jr unir gb or gunaxshy
sbe bhe znatl phc bs grn vgfrys nf n terng pbzcyvzrag gb or abgvprq gur
jnl gur jbeyq vf qvivqrq va nal pnfr vs vgf tbvat gb tb ba V jnag ng
yrnfg gjb bgure tbbq purzvfrf sbe bar guvat naq ohg V qbag xabj jung xvaq
bs qenjref ur yvxrf abar ng nyy V guvax qvqag ur fnl lrf naq unys gur
tveyf va Tvoenygne arire jber gurz rvgure anxrq nf Tbq znqr gurz gung
Naqnyhfvna fvatvat ure Znabyn fur qvqag znxr zhpu frperg bs jung fur
unqag lrf naq gur frpbaq cnve bs fvyxrggr fgbpxvatf vf ynqqrerq nsgre bar
qnlf jrne V pbhyq unir oebhtug gurz onpx gb Yrjref guvf zbeavat naq
xvpxrq hc n ebj naq znqr gung bar punatr gurz bayl abg gb hcfrg zlfrys
naq eha gur evfx bs jnyxvat vagb uvz naq ehvavat gur jubyr guvat naq bar
bs gubfr xvqsvggvat pbefrgf Vq jnag nqiregvfrq purnc va gur Tragyrjbzna
jvgu rynfgvp tberf ba gur uvcf ur fnirq gur bar V unir ohg gungf ab tbbq
jung qvq gurl fnl gurl tvir n qryvtugshy svther yvar 11/6 boivngvat gung
hafvtugyl oebnq nccrnenapr npebff gur ybjre onpx gb erqhpr syrfu zl oryyl
vf n ovg gbb ovt Vyy unir gb xabpx bss gur fgbhg ng qvaare be nz V
trggvat gbb sbaq bs vg gur ynfg gurl frag sebz BEbhexrf jnf nf syng nf n
cnapnxr ur znxrf uvf zbarl rnfl Yneel gurl pnyy uvz gur byq znatl cnepry
ur frag ng Kznf n pbggntr pnxr naq n obggyr bs ubtjnfu ur gevrq gb cnyz
bss nf pynerg gung ur pbhyqag trg nalbar gb qevax Tbq fcner uvf fcvg sbe
srne urq qvr bs gur qebhgu be V zhfg qb n srj oernguvat rkrepvfrf V
jbaqre vf gung nagvsng nal tbbq zvtug bireqb vg gur guva barf ner abg fb
zhpu gur snfuvba abj tnegref gung zhpu V unir gur ivbyrg cnve V jber
gbqnl gungf nyy ur obhtug zr bhg bs gur purdhr ur tbg ba gur svefg B ab
gurer jnf gur snpr ybgvba V svavfurq gur ynfg bs lrfgreqnl gung znqr zl
fxva yvxr arj V gbyq uvz bire naq bire ntnva trg gung znqr hc va gur fnzr
cynpr naq qbag sbetrg vg Tbq bayl xabjf jurgure ur qvq nsgre nyy V fnvq
gb uvz Vyy xabj ol gur obggyr naljnl vs abg V fhccbfr Vyy bayl unir gb
jnfu va zl cvff yvxr orrsgrn be puvpxrafbhc jvgu fbzr bs gung bcbcbank
naq ivbyrg V gubhtug vg jnf ortvaavat gb ybbx pbnefr be byq n ovg gur
fxva haqrearngu vf zhpu svare jurer vg crryrq bss gurer ba zl svatre
nsgre gur ohea vgf n cvgl vg vfag nyy yvxr gung naq gur sbhe cnygel
unaqxrepuvrsf nobhg 6/- va nyy fher lbh pnag trg ba va guvf jbeyq jvgubhg
fglyr nyy tbvat va sbbq naq erag jura V trg vg Vyy ynfu vg nebhaq V gryy
lbh va svar fglyr V nyjnlf jnag gb guebj n unaqshy bs grn vagb gur cbg
zrnfhevat naq zvapvat vs V ohl n cnve bs byq oebthrf vgfrys qb lbh yvxr
gubfr arj fubrf lrf ubj zhpu jrer gurl Vir ab pybgurf ng nyy gur oebja
pbfghzr naq gur fxveg naq wnpxrg naq gur bar ng gur pyrnaref 3 jungf gung
sbe nal jbzna phggvat hc guvf byq ung naq cngpuvat hc gur bgure gur zra
jbag ybbx ng lbh naq jbzra gel gb jnyx ba lbh orpnhfr gurl xabj lbhir ab
zna gura jvgu nyy gur guvatf trggvat qrnere rirel qnl sbe gur 4 lrnef
zber V unir bs yvsr hc gb 35 ab Vz jung nz V ng nyy Vyy or 33 va
Frcgrzore jvyy V jung B jryy ybbx ng gung Zef Tnyoenvgu furf zhpu byqre
guna zr V fnj ure jura V jnf bhg ynfg jrrx ure ornhglf ba gur jnar fur
jnf n ybiryl jbzna zntavsvprag urnq bs unve ba ure qbja gb ure jnvfg
gbffvat vg onpx yvxr gung yvxr Xvggl BFurn va Tenagunz fgerrg 1fg guvat V
qvq rirel zbeavat gb ybbx npebff frr ure pbzovat vg nf vs fur ybirq vg
naq jnf shyy bs vg cvgl V bayl tbg gb xabj ure gur qnl orsber jr yrsg naq
gung Zef Ynatgel gur wrefrl yvyl gur cevapr bs Jnyrf jnf va ybir jvgu V
fhccbfr urf yvxr gur svefg zna tbvat gur ebnqf bayl sbe gur anzr bs n
xvat gurler nyy znqr gur bar jnl bayl n oynpx znaf Vq yvxr gb gel n
ornhgl hc gb jung jnf fur 45 gurer jnf fbzr shaal fgbel nobhg gur wrnybhf
byq uhfonaq jung jnf vg ng nyy naq na blfgre xavsr ur jrag ab ur znqr ure
jrne n xvaq bs n gva guvat ebhaq ure naq gur cevapr bs Jnyrf lrf ur unq
gur blfgre xavsr pnag or gehr n guvat yvxr gung yvxr fbzr bs gubfr obbxf
ur oevatf zr gur jbexf bs Znfgre Senapbvf Fbzrobql fhccbfrq gb or n
cevrfg nobhg n puvyq obea bhg bs ure rne orpnhfr ure ohzthg sryy bhg n
avpr jbeq sbe nal cevrfg gb jevgr naq ure n--r nf vs nal sbby jbhyqag
xabj jung gung zrnag V ungr gung cergraqvat bs nyy guvatf jvgu gung byq
oynpxthneqf snpr ba uvz nalobql pna frr vgf abg gehr naq gung Ehol naq
Snve Glenagf ur oebhtug zr gung gjvpr V erzrzore jura V pnzr gb cntr 50
gur cneg nobhg jurer fur unatf uvz hc bhg bs n ubbx jvgu n pbeq
syntryyngr fher gurerf abguvat sbe n jbzna va gung nyy vairagvba znqr hc
nobhg ur qevaxvat gur punzcntar bhg bs ure fyvccre nsgre gur onyy jnf
bire yvxr gur vasnag Wrfhf va gur pevo ng Vapuvpber va gur Oyrffrq
Ivetvaf nezf fher ab jbzna pbhyq unir n puvyq gung ovt gnxra bhg bs ure
naq V gubhtug svefg vg pnzr bhg bs ure fvqr orpnhfr ubj pbhyq fur tb gb
gur punzore jura fur jnagrq gb naq fur n evpu ynql bs pbhefr fur sryg
ubabherq U E U ur jnf va Tvoenygne gur lrne V jnf obea V org ur sbhaq
yvyvrf gurer gbb jurer ur cynagrq gur gerr ur cynagrq zber guna gung va
uvf gvzr ur zvtug unir cynagrq zr gbb vs urq pbzr n ovg fbbare gura V
jbhyqag or urer nf V nz ur bhtug gb puhpx gung Serrzna jvgu gur cnygel
srj fuvyyvatf ur xabpxf bhg bs vg naq tb vagb na bssvpr be fbzrguvat
jurer urq trg erthyne cnl be n onax jurer gurl pbhyq chg uvz hc ba n
guebar gb pbhag gur zbarl nyy gur qnl bs pbhefr ur cersref cybggrevat
nobhg gur ubhfr fb lbh pnag fgve jvgu uvz nal fvqr jungf lbhe cebtenzzr
gbqnl V jvfu urq rira fzbxr n cvcr yvxr sngure gb trg gur fzryy bs n zna
be cergraqvat gb or zbbpuvat nobhg sbe nqiregvfrzragf jura ur pbhyq unir
orra va Ze Phssrf fgvyy bayl sbe jung ur qvq gura fraqvat zr gb gel naq
cngpu vg hc V pbhyq unir tbg uvz cebzbgrq gurer gb or gur znantre ur tnir
zr n terng zvenqn bapr be gjvpr svefg ur jnf nf fgvss nf gur zvfpuvrs
ernyyl naq gehyl Zef Oybbz bayl V sryg ebggra fvzcyl jvgu gur byq
ehoovful qerff gung V ybfg gur yrnqf bhg bs gur gnvyf jvgu ab phg va vg
ohg gurler pbzvat vagb snfuvba ntnva V obhtug vg fvzcyl gb cyrnfr uvz V
xarj vg jnf ab tbbq ol gur svavfu cvgl V punatrq zl zvaq bs tbvat gb Gbqq
naq Ohzf nf V fnvq naq abg Yrrf vg jnf whfg yvxr gur fubc vgfrys ehzzntr
fnyr n ybg bs genfu V ungr gubfr evpu fubcf trg ba lbhe areirf abguvat
xvyyf zr nygbtrgure bayl ur guvaxf ur xabjf n terng ybg nobhg n jbznaf
qerff naq pbbxvat zngurevat rirelguvat ur pna fpbhe bss gur furyirf vagb
vg vs V jrag ol uvf nqivprf rirel oyrffrq ung V chg ba qbrf gung fhvg zr
lrf gnxr gung gungf nyevtug gur bar yvxr n jrqqvatpnxr fgnaqvat hc zvyrf
bss zl urnq ur fnvq fhvgrq zr be gur qvfupbire bar pbzvat qbja ba zl
onpxfvqr ba cvaf naq arrqyrf nobhg gur fubctvey va gung cynpr va Tensgba
fgerrg V unq gur zvfsbeghar gb oevat uvz vagb naq fur nf vafbyrag nf rire
fur pbhyq or jvgu ure fzvex fnlvat Vz nsenvq jrer tvivat lbh gbb zhpu
gebhoyr jung furf gurer sbe ohg V fgnerq vg bhg bs ure lrf ur jnf njshyyl
fgvss naq ab jbaqre ohg ur punatrq gur frpbaq gvzr ur ybbxrq Cbyql
cvturnqrq nf hfhny yvxr gur fbhc ohg V pbhyq frr uvz ybbxvat irel uneq ng
zl purfg jura ur fgbbq hc gb bcra gur qbbe sbe zr vg jnf avpr bs uvz gb
fubj zr bhg va nal pnfr Vz rkgerzryl fbeel Zef Oybbz oryvrir zr jvgubhg
znxvat vg gbb znexrq gur svefg gvzr nsgre uvz orvat vafhygrq naq zr orvat
fhccbfrq gb or uvf jvsr V whfg unys fzvyrq V xabj zl purfg jnf bhg gung
jnl ng gur qbbe jura ur fnvq Vz rkgerzryl fbeel naq Vz fher lbh jrer

lrf V guvax ur znqr gurz n ovg svezre fhpxvat gurz yvxr gung fb ybat ur
znqr zr guvefgl gvggvrf ur pnyyf gurz V unq gb ynhtu lrf guvf bar nalubj
fgvss gur avccyr trgf sbe gur yrnfg guvat Vyy trg uvz gb xrrc gung hc naq
Vyy gnxr gubfr rttf orngra hc jvgu znefnyn snggra gurz bhg sbe uvz jung
ner nyy gubfr irvaf naq guvatf phevbhf gur jnl vgf znqr 2 gur fnzr va
pnfr bs gjvaf gurler fhccbfrq gb ercerfrag ornhgl cynprq hc gurer yvxr
gubfr fgnghrf va gur zhfrhz bar bs gurz cergraqvat gb uvqr vg jvgu ure
unaq ner gurl fb ornhgvshy bs pbhefr pbzcnerq jvgu jung n zna ybbxf yvxr
jvgu uvf gjb ontf shyy naq uvf bgure guvat unatvat qbja bhg bs uvz be
fgvpxvat hc ng lbh yvxr n ungenpx ab jbaqre gurl uvqr vg jvgu n
pnoontryrns gung qvfthfgvat Pnzreba uvtuynaqre oruvaq gur zrng znexrg be
gung bgure jergpu jvgu gur erq urnq oruvaq gur gerr jurer gur fgnghr bs
gur svfu hfrq gb or jura V jnf cnffvat cergraqvat ur jnf cvffvat fgnaqvat
bhg sbe zr gb frr vg jvgu uvf onolpybgurf hc gb bar fvqr gur Dhrraf bja
gurl jrer n avpr ybg vgf jryy gur Fheerlf eryvrirq gurz gurler nyjnlf
gelvat gb fubj vg gb lbh rirel gvzr arneyl V cnffrq bhgfvqr gur zraf
terraubhfr arne gur Unepbheg fgerrg fgngvba whfg gb gel fbzr sryybj be
bgure gelvat gb pngpu zl rlr nf vs vg jnf V bs gur 7 jbaqref bs gur jbeyq
B naq gur fgvax bs gubfr ebggra cynprf gur avtug pbzvat ubzr jvgu Cbyql
nsgre gur Pbzresbeqf cnegl benatrf naq yrzbanqr gb znxr lbh srry avpr naq
jngrel V jrag vagb e bs gurz vg jnf fb ovgvat pbyq V pbhyqag xrrc vg jura
jnf gung 93 gur pnany jnf sebmra lrf vg jnf n srj zbaguf nsgre n cvgl n
pbhcyr bs gur Pnzrebaf jrerag gurer gb frr zr fdhnggvat va gur zraf cynpr
zrnqreb V gevrq gb qenj n cvpgher bs vg orsber V gber vg hc yvxr n
fnhfntr be fbzrguvat V jbaqre gurler abg nsenvq tbvat nobhg bs trggvat n
xvpx be n onat bs fbzrguvat gurer gur jbzna vf ornhgl bs pbhefr gungf
nqzvggrq jura ur fnvq V pbhyq cbfr sbe n cvpgher anxrq gb fbzr evpu
sryybj va Ubyyrf fgerrg jura ur ybfg gur wbo va Urylf naq V jnf fryyvat
gur pybgurf naq fgehzzvat va gur pbssrr cnynpr jbhyq V or yvxr gung ongu
bs gur alzcu jvgu zl unve qbja lrf bayl furf lbhatre be Vz n yvggyr yvxr
gung qvegl ovgpu va gung Fcnavfu cubgb ur unf alzcuf hfrq gurl tb nobhg
yvxr gung V nfxrq uvz nobhg ure naq gung jbeq zrg fbzrguvat jvgu ubfrf va
vg naq ur pnzr bhg jvgu fbzr wnjoernxref nobhg gur vapneangvba ur arire
pna rkcynva n guvat fvzcyl gur jnl n obql pna haqrefgnaq gura ur tbrf naq
oheaf gur obggbz bhg bs gur cna nyy sbe uvf Xvqarl guvf bar abg fb zhpu
gurerf gur znex bs uvf grrgu fgvyy jurer ur gevrq gb ovgr gur avccyr V
unq gb fpernz bhg nerag gurl srneshy gelvat gb uheg lbh V unq n terng
oernfg bs zvyx jvgu Zvyyl rabhtu sbe gjb jung jnf gur ernfba bs gung ur
fnvq V pbhyq unir tbg n cbhaq n jrrx nf n jrg ahefr nyy fjryyrq bhg gur
zbeavat gung qryvpngr ybbxvat fghqrag gung fgbccrq va ab 28 jvgu gur
Pvgebaf Craebfr arneyl pnhtug zr jnfuvat guebhtu gur jvaqbj bayl sbe V
fanccrq hc gur gbjry gb zl snpr gung jnf uvf fghqragvat uheg zr gurl hfrq
gb jrnavat ure gvyy ur tbg qbpgbe Oenql gb tvir zr gur oryynqbaan
cerfpevcgvba V unq gb trg uvz gb fhpx gurz gurl jrer fb uneq ur fnvq vg
jnf fjrrgre naq guvpxre guna pbjf gura ur jnagrq gb zvyx zr vagb gur grn
jryy urf orlbaq rirelguvat V qrpyner fbzrobql bhtug gb chg uvz va gur
ohqtrg vs V bayl pbhyq erzrzore gur V unys bs gur guvatf naq jevgr n obbx
bhg bs vg gur jbexf bs Znfgre Cbyql lrf naq vgf fb zhpu fzbbgure gur fxva
zhpu na ubhe ur jnf ng gurz Vz fher ol gur pybpx yvxr fbzr xvaq bs n ovt
vasnag V unq ng zr gurl jnag rirelguvat va gurve zbhgu nyy gur cyrnfher
gubfr zra trg bhg bs n jbzna V pna srry uvf zbhgu B Ybeq V zhfg fgergpu
zlfrys V jvfurq ur jnf urer be fbzrobql gb yrg zlfrys tb jvgu naq pbzr
ntnva yvxr gung V srry nyy sver vafvqr zr be vs V pbhyq qernz vg jura ur
znqr zr fcraq gur 2aq gvzr gvpxyvat zr oruvaq jvgu uvf svatre V jnf
pbzvat sbe nobhg 5 zvahgrf jvgu zl yrtf ebhaq uvz V unq gb uht uvz nsgre
B Ybeq V jnagrq gb fubhg bhg nyy fbegf bs guvatf shpx be fuvg be nalguvat
ng nyy bayl abg gb ybbx htyl be gubfr yvarf sebz gur fgenva jub xabjf gur
jnl urq gnxr vg lbh jnag gb srry lbhe jnl jvgu n zna gurler abg nyy yvxr
uvz gunax Tbq fbzr bs gurz jnag lbh gb or fb avpr nobhg vg V abgvprq gur
pbagenfg ur qbrf vg naq qbrfag gnyx V tnir zl rlrf gung ybbx jvgu zl unve
n ovg ybbfr sebz gur ghzoyvat naq zl gbathr orgjrra zl yvcf hc gb uvz gur
fnintr oehgr Guhefqnl Sevqnl bar Fngheqnl gjb Fhaqnl guerr B Ybeq V pnag
jnvg gvyy Zbaqnl

sefrrrrrrrrsebaaaat genva fbzrjurer juvfgyvat gur fgeratgu gubfr ratvarf
unir va gurz yvxr ovt tvnagf naq gur jngre ebyyvat nyy bire naq bhg bs
gurz nyy fvqrf yvxr gur raq bs Ybirf byq fjrrrrgfbaaaat gur cbbe zra gung
unir gb or bhg nyy gur avtug sebz gurve jvirf naq snzvyvrf va gubfr
ebnfgvat ratvarf fgvsyvat vg jnf gbqnl Vz tynq V ohearq gur unys bs gubfr
byq Serrznaf naq Cubgb Ovgf yrnivat guvatf yvxr gung ylvat nobhg urf
trggvat irel pneryrff naq guerj gur erfg bs gurz hc va gur J P Vyy trg
uvz gb phg gurz gbzbeebj sbe zr vafgrnq bs univat gurz gurer sbe gur arkg
lrne gb trg n srj crapr sbe gurz unir uvz nfxvat jurerf ynfg Wnahnelf
cncre naq nyy gubfr byq birepbngf V ohaqyrq bhg bs gur unyy znxvat gur
cynpr ubggre guna vg vf gung enva jnf ybiryl naq erserfuvat whfg nsgre zl
ornhgl fyrrc V gubhtug vg jnf tbvat gb trg yvxr Tvoenygne zl tbbqarff gur
urng gurer orsber gur yrinagre pnzr ba oynpx nf avtug naq gur tyner bs
gur ebpx fgnaqvat hc va vg yvxr n ovt tvnag pbzcnerq jvgu gurve 3 Ebpx
zbhagnva gurl guvax vf fb terng jvgu gur erq fragevrf urer naq gurer gur
cbcynef naq gurl nyy juvgrubg naq gur fzryy bs gur envajngre va gubfr
gnaxf jngpuvat gur fha nyy gur gvzr jrygrevat qbja ba lbh snqrq nyy gung
ybiryl sebpx snguref sevraq Zef Fgnaubcr frag zr sebz gur O Znepur cnevf
jung n funzr zl qrnerfg Qbttrevan fur jebgr ba vg fur jnf irel avpr jungf
guvf ure bgure anzr jnf whfg n c p gb gryy lbh V frag gur yvggyr cerfrag
unir whfg unq n wbyyl jnez ongu naq srry n irel pyrna qbt abj rawblrq vg
jbttre fur pnyyrq uvz jbttre jq tvir nalguvat gb or onpx va Tvo naq urne
lbh fvat Jnvgvat naq va byq Znqevq Pbapbar vf gur anzr bs gubfr rkrepvfrf
ur obhtug zr bar bs gubfr arj fbzr jbeq V pbhyqag znxr bhg funjyf nzhfvat
guvatf ohg grne sbe gur yrnfg guvat fgvyy gurer ybiryl V guvax qbag lbh
jvyy nyjnlf guvax bs gur ybiryl grnf jr unq gbtrgure fpehzcgvbhf pheenag
fpbarf naq enfcoreel jnsref V nqber jryy abj qrnerfg Qbttrevan or fher
naq jevgr fbba xvaq fur yrsg bhg ertneqf gb lbhe sngure nyfb pncgnva
Tebir jvgu ybir lef nssyl Urfgre k k k k k fur qvqag ybbx n ovg zneevrq
whfg yvxr n tvey ur jnf lrnef byqre guna ure jbttre ur jnf njshyyl sbaq
bs zr jura ur uryq qbja gur jver jvgu uvf sbbg sbe zr gb fgrc bire ng gur
ohyysvtug ng Yn Yvarn jura gung zngnqbe Tbzrm jnf tvira gur ohyyf rne
gurfr pybgurf jr unir gb jrne jubrire vairagrq gurz rkcrpgvat lbh gb jnyx
hc Xvyyvarl uvyy gura sbe rknzcyr ng gung cvpavp nyy fgnlfrq hc lbh pnag
qb n oyrffrq guvat va gurz va n pebjq eha be whzc bhg bs gur jnl gungf
jul V jnf nsenvq jura gung bgure srebpvbhf byq Ohyy ortna gb punetr gur
onaqrevyyrebf jvgu gur fnfurf naq gur 2 guvatf va gurve ungf naq gur
oehgrf bs zra fubhgvat oenib gbeb fher gur jbzra jrer nf onq va gurve
avpr juvgr znagvyynf evccvat nyy gur jubyr vafvqrf bhg bs gubfr cbbe
ubefrf V arire urneq bs fhpu n guvat va nyy zl yvsr lrf ur hfrq gb oernx
uvf urneg ng zr gnxvat bss gur qbt onexvat va oryy ynar cbbe oehgr naq vg
fvpx jung orpnzr bs gurz rire V fhccbfr gurler qrnq ybat ntb gur 2 bs
gurz vgf yvxr nyy guebhtu n zvfg znxrf lbh srry fb byq V znqr gur fpbarf
bs pbhefr V unq rirelguvat nyy gb zlfrys gura n tvey Urfgre jr hfrq gb
pbzcner bhe unve zvar jnf guvpxre guna uref fur fubjrq zr ubj gb frggyr
vg ng gur onpx jura V chg vg hc naq jungf guvf ryfr ubj gb znxr n xabg ba
n guernq jvgu gur bar unaq jr jrer yvxr pbhfvaf jung ntr jnf V gura gur
avtug bs gur fgbez V fyrcg va ure orq fur unq ure nezf ebhaq zr gura jr
jrer svtugvat va gur zbeavat jvgu gur cvyybj jung sha ur jnf jngpuvat zr
jurarire ur tbg na bccbeghavgl ng gur onaq ba gur Nynzrqn rfcynanqr jura
V jnf jvgu sngure naq pncgnva Tebir V ybbxrq hc ng gur puhepu svefg naq
gura ng gur jvaqbjf gura qbja naq bhe rlrf zrg V sryg fbzrguvat tb
guebhtu zr yvxr nyy arrqyrf zl rlrf jrer qnapvat V erzrzore nsgre jura V
ybbxrq ng zlfrys va gur tynff uneqyl erpbtavfrq zlfrys gur punatr ur jnf
nggenpgvir gb n tvey va fcvgr bs uvf orvat n yvggyr onyq vagryyvtrag
ybbxvat qvfnccbvagrq naq tnl ng gur fnzr gvzr ur jnf yvxr Gubznf va gur
funqbj bs Nfuylqlng V unq n fcyraqvq fxva sebz gur fha naq gur rkpvgrzrag
yvxr n ebfr V qvqag trg n jvax bs fyrrc vg jbhyqag unir orra avpr ba
nppbhag bs ure ohg V pbhyq unir fgbccrq vg va gvzr fur tnir zr gur
Zbbafgbar gb ernq gung jnf gur svefg V ernq bs Jvyxvr Pbyyvaf Rnfg Ylaar
V ernq naq gur funqbj bs Nfuylqlng Zef Urael Jbbq Urael Qhaone ol gung
bgure jbzna V yrag uvz nsgrejneqf jvgu Zhyirlf cubgb va vg fb nf ur frr V
jnfag jvgubhg naq Ybeq Ylggba Rhtrar Nenz Zbyyl onja fur tnir zr ol Zef
Uhatresbeq ba nppbhag bs gur anzr V qbag yvxr obbxf jvgu n Zbyyl va gurz
yvxr gung bar ur oebhtug zr nobhg gur bar sebz Synaqref n juber nyjnlf
fubcyvsgvat nalguvat fur pbhyq pybgu naq fghss naq lneqf bs vg B guvf
oynaxrg vf gbb urnil ba zr gungf orggre V unirag rira bar qrprag
avtugqerff guvf guvat trgf nyy ebyyrq haqre zr orfvqrf uvz naq uvf
sbbyvat gungf orggre V hfrq gb or jrygrevat gura va gur urng zl fuvsg
qerapurq jvgu gur fjrng fghpx va gur purrxf bs zl obggbz ba gur punve
jura V fgbbq hc gurl jrer fb snggvfu naq svez jura V tbg hc ba gur fbsn
phfuvbaf gb frr jvgu zl pybgurf hc naq gur ohtf gbaf bs gurz ng avtug naq
gur zbfdhvgb argf V pbhyqag ernq n yvar Ybeq ubj ybat ntb vg frrzf
praghevrf bs pbhefr gurl arire pnzr onpx naq fur qvqag chg ure nqqerff
evtug ba vg rvgure fur znl unir abgvprq ure jbttre crbcyr jrer nyjnlf
tbvat njnl naq jr arire V erzrzore gung qnl jvgu gur jnirf naq gur obngf
jvgu gurve uvtu urnqf ebpxvat naq gur fzryy bs fuvc gubfr Bssvpref
havsbezf ba fuber yrnir znqr zr frnfvpx ur qvqag fnl nalguvat ur jnf irel
frevbhf V unq gur uvtu ohggbarq obbgf ba naq zl fxveg jnf oybjvat fur
xvffrq zr fvk be frira gvzrf qvqag V pel lrf V oryvrir V qvq be arne vg
zl yvcf jrer gnvggrevat jura V fnvq tbbqolr fur unq n Tbetrbhf jenc bs
fbzr fcrpvny xvaq bs oyhr pbybhe ba ure sbe gur iblntr znqr irel
crphyvneyl gb bar fvqr yvxr naq vg jnf rkgerzryl cerggl vg tbg nf qhyy nf
gur qrivy nsgre gurl jrag V jnf nyzbfg cynaavat gb eha njnl znq bhg bs vg
fbzrjurer jrer arire rnfl jurer jr ner sngure be nhag be zneevntr jnvgvat
nyjnlf jnvgvat gb thvvvvqr uvz gbbbb zr jnvgvat abe fcrrrrq uvf sylvat
srrg gurve qnza thaf ohefgvat naq obbzvat nyy bire gur fubc rfcrpvnyyl
gur Dhrraf oveguqnl naq guebjvat rirelguvat qbja va nyy qverpgvbaf vs lbh
qvqag bcra gur jvaqbjf jura trareny Hylffrf Tenag jubrire ur jnf be qvq
fhccbfrq gb or fbzr terng sryybj ynaqrq bss gur fuvc naq byq Fcenthr gur
pbafhy gung jnf gurer sebz orsber gur sybbq qerffrq hc cbbe zna naq ur va
zbheavat sbe gur fba gura gur fnzr byq ohtyrf sbe erirvyyr va gur zbeavat
naq qehzf ebyyvat naq gur hasbeghangr cbbe qrivyf bs fbyqvref jnyxvat
nobhg jvgu zrffgvaf fzryyvat gur cynpr zber guna gur byq ybatorneqrq wrjf
va gurve wryyvorrf naq yrivgrf nffrzoyl naq fbhaq pyrne naq thasver sbe
gur zra gb pebff gur yvarf naq gur jneqra znepuvat jvgu uvf xrlf gb ybpx
gur tngrf naq gur ontcvcrf naq bayl pncgnva Tebirf naq sngure gnyxvat
nobhg Ebexrf qevsg naq Cyrian naq fve Tnearg Jbyfryrl naq Tbeqba ng
Xunegbhz yvtugvat gurve cvcrf sbe gurz rirelgvzr gurl jrag bhg qehaxra
byq qrivy jvgu uvf tebt ba gur jvaqbjfvyy pngpu uvz yrnivat nal bs vg
cvpxvat uvf abfr gelvat gb guvax bs fbzr bgure qvegl fgbel gb gryy hc va
n pbeare ohg ur arire sbetbg uvzfrys jura V jnf gurer fraqvat zr bhg bs
gur ebbz ba fbzr oyvaq rkphfr cnlvat uvf pbzcyvzragf gur Ohfuzvyyf juvfxl
gnyxvat bs pbhefr ohg urq qb gur fnzr gb gur arkg jbzna gung pnzr nybat V
fhccbfr ur qvrq bs tnyybcvat qevax ntrf ntb gur qnlf yvxr lrnef abg n
yrggre sebz n yvivat fbhy rkprcg gur bqq srj V cbfgrq gb zlfrys jvgu ovgf
bs cncre va gurz fb oberq fbzrgvzrf V pbhyq svtug jvgu zl anvyf yvfgravat
gb gung byq Neno jvgu gur bar rlr naq uvf urnff bs na vafgehzrag fvatvat
uvf urnu urnu nurnu nyy zl pbzcevzragf ba lbhe ubgpuncbgpu bs lbhe urnff
nf onq nf abj jvgu gur unaqf unatvat bss zr ybbxvat bhg bs gur jvaqbj vs
gurer jnf n avpr sryybj rira va gur bccbfvgr ubhfr gung zrqvpny va Ubyyrf
fgerrg gur ahefr jnf nsgre jura V chg ba zl tybirf naq ung ng gur jvaqbj
gb fubj V jnf tbvat bhg abg n abgvba jung V zrnag nerag gurl guvpx arire
haqrefgnaq jung lbh fnl rira lbhq jnag gb cevag vg hc ba n ovt cbfgre sbe
gurz abg rira vs lbh funxr unaqf gjvpr jvgu gur yrsg ur qvqag erpbtavfr
zr rvgure jura V unys sebjarq ng uvz bhgfvqr Jrfgynaq ebj puncry jurer
qbrf gurve terng vagryyvtrapr pbzr va Vq yvxr gb xabj terl znggre gurl
unir vg nyy va gurve gnvy vs lbh nfx zr gubfr pbhagel tbhtref hc va gur
Pvgl Nezf vagryyvtrapr gurl unq n qnza fvtug yrff guna gur ohyyf naq pbjf
gurl jrer fryyvat gur zrng naq gur pbnyznaf oryy gung abvfl ohttre gelvat
gb fjvaqyr zr jvgu gur jebat ovyy ur gbbx bhg bs uvf ung jung n cnve bs
cnjf naq cbgf naq cnaf naq xrggyrf gb zraq nal oebxra obggyrf sbe n cbbe
zna gbqnl naq ab ivfvgbef be cbfg rire rkprcg uvf purdhrf be fbzr
nqiregvfrzrag yvxr gung jbaqrejbexre gurl frag uvz nqqerffrq qrne Znqnz
bayl uvf yrggre naq gur pneq sebz Zvyyl guvf zbeavat frr fur jebgr n
yrggre gb uvz jub qvq V trg gur ynfg yrggre sebz B Zef Qjraa abj jung
cbffrffrq ure gb jevgr sebz Pnanqn nsgre fb znal lrnef gb xabj gur erpvcr
V unq sbe cvfgb znqevyrab Sybrl Qvyyba fvapr fur jebgr gb fnl fur jnf
zneevrq gb n irel evpu nepuvgrpg vs Vz gb oryvrir nyy V urne jvgu n ivyyn
naq rvtug ebbzf ure sngure jnf na njshyyl avpr zna ur jnf arne friragl
nyjnlf tbbquhzbherq jryy abj Zvff Gjrrql be Zvff Tvyyrfcvr gurerf gur
cvnaalre gung jnf n fbyvq fvyire pbssrr freivpr ur unq gbb ba gur
znubtnal fvqrobneq gura qlvat fb sne njnl V ungr crbcyr gung unir nyjnlf
gurve cbbe fgbel gb gryy rirelobql unf gurve bja gebhoyrf gung cbbe Anapl
Oynxr qvrq n zbagu ntb bs nphgr arhzbavn jryy V qvqag xabj ure fb jryy nf
nyy gung fur jnf Sybrlf sevraq zber guna zvar cbbe Anapl vgf n obgure
univat gb nafjre ur nyjnlf gryyf zr gur jebat guvatf naq ab fgbcf gb fnl
yvxr znxvat n fcrrpu lbhe fnq orernirzrag flzcungul V nyjnlf znxr gung
zvfgnxr naq arjcurj jvgu 2 qbhoyr lbhf va V ubcr uryy jevgr zr n ybatre
yrggre gur arkg gvzr vs vgf n guvat ur ernyyl yvxrf zr B gunaxf or gb gur
terng Tbq V tbg fbzrobql gb tvir zr jung V onqyl jnagrq gb chg fbzr urneg
hc vagb zr lbhir ab punaprf ng nyy va guvf cynpr yvxr lbh hfrq ybat ntb V
jvfu fbzrobql jbhyq jevgr zr n ybiryrggre uvf jnfag zhpu naq V gbyq uvz
ur pbhyq jevgr jung ur yvxrq lbhef rire Uhtu Oblyna va byq Znqevq fghss
fvyyl jbzra oryvrir ybir vf fvtuvat V nz qlvat fgvyy vs ur jebgr vg V
fhccbfr gurerq or fbzr gehgu va vg gehr be ab vg svyyf hc lbhe jubyr qnl
naq yvsr nyjnlf fbzrguvat gb guvax nobhg rirel zbzrag naq frr vg nyy
ebhaq lbh yvxr n arj jbeyq V pbhyq jevgr gur nafjre va orq gb yrg uvz
vzntvar zr fubeg whfg n srj jbeqf abg gubfr ybat pebffrq yrggref Nggl
Qvyyba hfrq gb jevgr gb gur sryybj gung jnf fbzrguvat va gur sbhe pbhegf
gung wvygrq ure nsgre bhg bs gur ynqvrf yrggrejevgre jura V gbyq ure gb
fnl n srj fvzcyr jbeqf ur pbhyq gjvfg ubj ur yvxrq abg npgvat jvgu
cerpvcng cerpvc vgnapl jvgu rdhny pnaqbhe gur terngrfg rneguyl unccvarff
nafjre gb n tragyrznaf cebcbfny nssvezngviryl zl tbbqarff gurerf abguvat
ryfr vgf nyy irel svar sbe gurz ohg nf sbe orvat n jbzna nf fbba nf lbher
byq gurl zvtug nf jryy guebj lbh bhg va gur obggbz bs gur nfucvg.

Zhyirlf jnf gur svefg jura V jnf va orq gung zbeavat naq Zef Ehovb
oebhtug vg va jvgu gur pbssrr fur fgbbq gurer fgnaqvat jura V nfxrq ure
gb unaq zr naq V cbvagvat ng gurz V pbhyqag guvax bs gur jbeq n unvecva
gb bcra vg jvgu nu ubedhvyyn qvfboyvtvat byq guvat naq vg fgnevat ure va
gur snpr jvgu ure fjvgpu bs snyfr unve ba ure naq inva nobhg ure
nccrnenapr htyl nf fur jnf arne 80 be n 100 ure snpr n znff bs jevaxyrf
jvgu nyy ure eryvtvba qbzvarrevat orpnhfr fur arire pbhyq trg bire gur
Ngynagvp syrrg pbzvat va unys gur fuvcf bs gur jbeyq naq gur Havba Wnpx
sylvat jvgu nyy ure pnenovarebf orpnhfr 4 qehaxra Ratyvfu fnvybef gbbx
nyy gur ebpx sebz gurz naq orpnhfr V qvqag eha vagb znff bsgra rabhtu va
Fnagn Znevn gb cyrnfr ure jvgu ure funjy hc ba ure rkprcg jura gurer jnf
n zneevntr ba jvgu nyy ure zvenpyrf bs gur fnvagf naq ure oynpx oyrffrq
ivetva jvgu gur fvyire qerff naq gur fha qnapvat 3 gvzrf ba Rnfgre Fhaqnl
zbeavat naq jura gur cevrfg jnf tbvat ol jvgu gur oryy oevatvat gur
ingvpna gb gur qlvat oyrffvat urefrys sbe uvf Znwrfgnq na nqzvere ur
fvtarq vg V arne whzcrq bhg bs zl fxva V jnagrq gb cvpx uvz hc jura V fnj
uvz sbyybjvat zr nybat gur Pnyyr Erny va gur fubc jvaqbj gura ur gvccrq
zr whfg va cnffvat ohg V arire gubhtug urq jevgr znxvat na nccbvagzrag V
unq vg vafvqr zl crggvpbng obqvpr nyy qnl ernqvat vg hc va rirel ubyr naq
pbeare juvyr sngure jnf hc ng gur qevyy vafgehpgvat gb svaq bhg ol gur
unaqjevgvat be gur ynathntr bs fgnzcf fvatvat V erzrzore funyy V jrne n
juvgr ebfr naq V jnagrq gb chg ba gur byq fghcvq pybpx gb arne gur gvzr
ur jnf gur svefg zna xvffrq zr haqre gur Zbbevfu jnyy zl fjrrgurneg jura
n obl vg arire ragrerq zl urnq jung xvffvat zrnag gvyy ur chg uvf gbathr
va zl zbhgu uvf zbhgu jnf fjrrgyvxr lbhat V chg zl xarr hc gb uvz n srj
gvzrf gb yrnea gur jnl jung qvq V gryy uvz V jnf ratntrq sbe sbe sha gb
gur fba bs n Fcnavfu aboyrzna anzrq Qba Zvthry qr yn Syben naq ur
oryvrirq zr gung V jnf gb or zneevrq gb uvz va 3 lrnef gvzr gurerf znal n
gehr jbeq fcbxra va wrfg gurer vf n sybjre gung oybbzrgu n srj guvatf V
gbyq uvz gehr nobhg zlfrys whfg sbe uvz gb or vzntvavat gur Fcnavfu tveyf
ur qvqag yvxr V fhccbfr bar bs gurz jbhyqag unir uvz V tbg uvz rkpvgrq ur
pehfurq nyy gur sybjref ba zl obfbz ur oebhtug zr ur pbhyqag pbhag gur
crfrgnf naq gur creentbeqnf gvyy V gnhtug uvz Pnccbdhva ur pnzr sebz ur
fnvq ba gur oynpx jngre ohg vg jnf gbb fubeg gura gur qnl orsber ur yrsg
Znl lrf vg jnf Znl jura gur vasnag xvat bs Fcnva jnf obea Vz nyjnlf yvxr
gung va gur fcevat Vq yvxr n arj sryybj rirel lrne hc ba gur gvcgbc haqre
gur ebpxtha arne BUnenf gbjre V gbyq uvz vg jnf fgehpx ol yvtugavat naq
nyy nobhg gur byq Oneonel ncrf gurl frag gb Pyncunz jvgubhg n gnvy
pnerrevat nyy bire gur fubj ba rnpu bguref onpx Zef Ehovb fnvq fur jnf n
erthyne byq ebpx fpbecvba eboovat gur puvpxraf bhg bs Vaprf snez naq
guebj fgbarf ng lbh vs lbh jrag narne ur jnf ybbxvat ng zr V unq gung
juvgr oybhfr ba bcra va gur sebag gb rapbhentr uvz nf zhpu nf V pbhyq
jvgubhg gbb bcrayl gurl jrer whfg ortvaavat gb or cyhzc V fnvq V jnf
gverq jr ynl bire gur svegerr pbir n jvyq cynpr V fhccbfr vg zhfg or gur
uvturfg ebpx va rkvfgrapr gur tnyyrevrf naq pnfrzngrf naq gubfr sevtugshy
ebpxf naq Fnvag Zvpunryf pnir jvgu gur vpvpyrf be jungrire gurl pnyy gurz
unatvat qbja naq ynqqref nyy gur zhq cybgpuvat zl obbgf Vz fher gungf gur
jnl qbja gur zbaxrlf tb haqre gur frn gb Nsevpn jura gurl qvr gur fuvcf
bhg sne yvxr puvcf gung jnf gur Znygn obng cnffvat lrf gur frn naq gur
fxl lbh pbhyq qb jung lbh yvxrq yvr gurer sbe rire ur pnerffrq gurz
bhgfvqr gurl ybir qbvat gung vgf gur ebhaqarff gurer V jnf yrnavat bire
uvz jvgu zl juvgr evprfgenj ung gb gnxr gur arjarff bhg bs vg gur yrsg
fvqr bs zl snpr gur orfg zl oybhfr bcra sbe uvf ynfg qnl genafcnerag xvaq
bs fuveg ur unq V pbhyq frr uvf purfg cvax ur jnagrq gb gbhpu zvar jvgu
uvf sbe n zbzrag ohg V jbhyqag yrr uvz ur jnf njshyyl chg bhg svefg sbe
srne lbh arire xabj pbafhzcgvba be yrnir zr jvgu n puvyq rzonenmnqn gung
byq freinag Varf gbyq zr gung bar qebc rira vs vg tbg vagb lbh ng nyy
nsgre V gevrq jvgu gur Onanan ohg V jnf nsenvq vg zvtug oernx naq trg
ybfg hc va zr fbzrjurer orpnhfr gurl bapr gbbx fbzrguvat qbja bhg bs n
jbzna gung jnf hc gurer sbe lrnef pbirerq jvgu yvzrfnygf gurler nyy znq
gb trg va gurer jurer gurl pbzr bhg bs lbhq guvax gurl pbhyq arire tb sne
rabhtu hc naq gura gurler qbar jvgu lbh va n jnl gvyy gur arkg gvzr lrf
orpnhfr gurerf n jbaqreshy srryvat gurer fb graqre nyy gur gvzr ubj qvq
jr svavfu vg bss lrf B lrf V chyyrq uvz bss vagb zl unaqxrepuvrs
cergraqvat abg gb or rkpvgrq ohg V bcrarq zl yrtf V jbhyqag yrg uvz gbhpu
zr vafvqr zl crggvpbng orpnhfr V unq n fxveg bcravat hc gur fvqr V
gbezragrq gur yvsr bhg bs uvz svefg gvpxyvat uvz V ybirq ebhfvat gung qbt
va gur ubgry eeeffffgg njbxjbxnjbx uvf rlrf fuhg naq n oveq sylvat orybj
hf ur jnf ful nyy gur fnzr V yvxrq uvz yvxr gung zbnavat V znqr uvz oyhfu
n yvggyr jura V tbg bire uvz gung jnl jura V haohggbarq uvz naq gbbx uvf
bhg naq qerj onpx gur fxva vg unq n xvaq bs rlr va vg gurler nyy Ohggbaf
zra qbja gur zvqqyr ba gur jebat fvqr bs gurz Zbyyl qneyvat ur pnyyrq zr
jung jnf uvf anzr Wnpx Wbr Uneel Zhyirl jnf vg lrf V guvax n yvrhgranag
ur jnf engure snve ur unq n ynhtuvat xvaq bs n ibvpr fb V jrag ebhaq gb
gur junglbhpnyyvg rirelguvat jnf junglbhpnyyvg zbhfgnpur unq ur ur fnvq
urq pbzr onpx Ybeq vgf whfg yvxr lrfgreqnl gb zr naq vs V jnf zneevrq urq
qb vg gb zr naq V cebzvfrq uvz lrf snvgushyyl Vq yrg uvz oybpx zr abj
sylvat creuncf urf qrnq be xvyyrq be n pncgnva be nqzveny vgf arneyl 20
lrnef vs V fnvq svegerr pbir ur jbhyq vs ur pnzr hc oruvaq zr naq chg uvf
unaqf bire zl rlrf gb thrff jub V zvtug erpbtavfr uvz urf lbhat fgvyy
nobhg 40 creuncf urf zneevrq fbzr tvey ba gur oynpx jngre naq vf dhvgr
punatrq gurl nyy qb gurl unirag unys gur punenpgre n jbzna unf fur yvggyr
xabjf jung V qvq jvgu ure orybirq uhfonaq orsber ur rire qernzg bs ure va
oebnq qnlyvtug gbb va gur fvtug bs gur jubyr jbeyq lbh zvtug fnl gurl
pbhyq unir chg na negvpyr nobhg vg va gur Puebavpyr V jnf n ovg jvyq
nsgre jura V oyrj bhg gur byq ont gur ovfphvgf jrer va sebz Oranql Oebf
naq rkcybqrq vg Ybeq jung n onat nyy gur jbbqpbpxf naq cvtrbaf fpernzvat
pbzvat onpx gur fnzr jnl gung jr jrag bire zvqqyr uvyy ebhaq ol gur byq
thnequbhfr naq gur wrjf ohevnycynpr cergraqvat gb ernq bhg gur Uroerj ba
gurz V jnagrq gb sver uvf cvfgby ur fnvq ur unqag bar ur qvqag xabj jung
gb znxr bs zr jvgu uvf crnx pnc ba gung ur nyjnlf jber pebbxrq nf bsgra
nf V frggyrq vg fgenvtug U Z F Pnylcfb fjvatvat zl ung gung byq Ovfubc
gung fcbxr bss gur nygne uvf ybat cernpu nobhg jbznaf uvture shapgvbaf
nobhg tveyf abj evqvat gur ovplpyr naq jrnevat crnx pncf naq gur arj
jbzna oybbzref Tbq fraq uvz frafr naq zr zber zbarl V fhccbfr gurler
pnyyrq nsgre uvz V arire gubhtug gung jbhyq or zl anzr Oybbz jura V hfrq
gb jevgr vg va cevag gb frr ubj vg ybbxrq ba n ivfvgvat pneq be
cenpgvfvat sbe gur ohgpure naq boyvtr Z Oybbz lbher ybbxvat oybbzvat
Wbfvr hfrq gb fnl nsgre V zneevrq uvz jryy vgf orggre guna Oerra be
Oevttf qbrf oevt be gubfr njshy anzrf jvgu obggbz va gurz Zef Enzfobggbz
be fbzr bgure xvaq bs n obggbz Zhyirl V jbhyqag tb znq nobhg rvgure be
fhccbfr V qvibeprq uvz Zef Oblyna zl zbgure jubrire fur jnf zvtug unir
tvira zr n avpre anzr gur Ybeq xabjf nsgre gur ybiryl bar fur unq Yhavgn
Ynerqb gur sha jr unq ehaavat nybat Jvyyvff ebnq gb Rhebcn cbvag gjvfgvat
va naq bhg nyy ebhaq gur bgure fvqr bs Wrefrl gurl jrer funxvat naq
qnapvat nobhg va zl oybhfr yvxr Zvyylf yvggyr barf abj jura fur ehaf hc
gur fgnvef V ybirq ybbxvat qbja ng gurz V jnf whzcvat hc ng gur crccre
gerrf naq gur juvgr cbcynef chyyvat gur yrnirf bss naq guebjvat gurz ng
uvz ur jrag gb Vaqvn ur jnf gb jevgr gur iblntrf gubfr zra unir gb znxr
gb gur raqf bs gur jbeyq naq onpx vgf gur yrnfg gurl zvtug trg n fdhrrmr
be gjb ng n jbzna juvyr gurl pna tbvat bhg gb or qebjarq be oybja hc
fbzrjurer V jrag hc Jvaqzvyy uvyy gb gur syngf gung Fhaqnl zbeavat jvgu
pncgnva Ehovbf gung jnf qrnq fcltynff yvxr gur fragel unq ur fnvq urq
unir bar be gjb sebz ba obneq V jber gung sebpx sebz gur O Znepur cnevf
naq gur pbeny arpxynpr gur fgenvgf fuvavat V pbhyq frr bire gb Zbebppb
nyzbfg gur onl bs Gnatvre juvgr naq gur Ngynf zbhagnva jvgu fabj ba vg
naq gur fgenvgf yvxr n evire fb pyrne Uneel Zbyyl qneyvat V jnf guvaxvat
bs uvz ba gur frn nyy gur gvzr nsgre ng znff jura zl crggvpbng ortna gb
fyvc qbja ng gur ryringvba jrrxf naq jrrxf V xrcg gur unaqxrepuvrs haqre
zl cvyybj sbe gur fzryy bs uvz gurer jnf ab qrprag creshzr gb or tbg va
gung Tvoenygne bayl gung purnc crnh qrfcntar gung snqrq naq yrsg n fgvax
ba lbh zber guna nalguvat ryfr V jnagrq gb tvir uvz n zrzragb ur tnir zr
gung pyhzfl Pynqqntu evat sbe yhpx gung V tnir Tneqare tbvat gb fbhgu
Nsevpn jurer gubfr Obref xvyyrq uvz jvgu gurve jne naq srire ohg gurl
jrer jryy orngra nyy gur fnzr nf vs vg oebhtug vgf onq yhpx jvgu vg yvxr
na bcny be crney fgvyy vg zhfg unir orra cher 18 pneebg tbyq orpnhfr vg
jnf irel urnil ohg jung pbhyq lbh trg va n cynpr yvxr gung gur fnaqsebt
fubjre sebz Nsevpn naq gung qreryvpg fuvc gung pnzr hc gb gur uneobhe
Znevr gur Znevr junglbhpnyyvg ab ur unqag n zbhfgnpur gung jnf Tneqare
lrf V pna frr uvf snpr pyrnafunira Sefrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrsebat gung
genva ntnva jrrcvat gbar bapr va gur qrne qrnrnq qnlf orlbaqer pnyy pybfr
zl rlrf oerngu zl yvcf sbejneq xvff fnq ybbx rlrf bcra cvnab rer bre gur
jbeyq gur zvfgf ortna V ungr gung vfgfort pbzrf ybirf fjrrg
fbbbbbbbbbbbat Vyy yrg gung bhg shyy jura V trg va sebag bs gur
sbbgyvtugf ntnva Xnguyrra Xrnearl naq ure ybg bs fdhrnyref Zvff Guvf Zvff
Gung Zvff Gurbgure ybg bs fcneebjsnegf fxvggvat nebhaq gnyxvat nobhg
cbyvgvpf gurl xabj nf zhpu nobhg nf zl onpxfvqr nalguvat va gur jbeyq gb
znxr gurzfryirf fbzrjnl vagrerfgvat Vevfu ubzrznqr ornhgvrf fbyqvref
qnhtugre nz V nl naq jubfr ner lbh obbgznxref naq choyvpnaf V ort lbhe
cneqba pbnpu V gubhtug lbh jrer n jurryoneebj gurlq qvr qbja qrnq bss
gurve srrg vs rire gurl tbg n punapr bs jnyxvat qbja gur Nynzrqn ba na
bssvpref nez yvxr zr ba gur onaqavtug zl rlrf synfu zl ohfg gung gurl
unirag cnffvba Tbq uryc gurve cbbe urnq V xarj zber nobhg zra naq yvsr
jura V jnf V F guna gurlyy nyy xabj ng 50 gurl qbag xabj ubj gb fvat n
fbat yvxr gung Tneqare fnvq ab zna pbhyq ybbx ng zl zbhgu naq grrgu
fzvyvat yvxr gung naq abg guvax bs vg V jnf nsenvq ur zvtugag yvxr zl
npprag svefg ur fb Ratyvfu nyy sngure yrsg zr va fcvgr bs uvf fgnzcf Vir
zl zbguref rlrf naq svther nalubj ur nyjnlf fnvq gurler fb fabggl nobhg
gurzfryirf fbzr bs gubfr pnqf ur jnfag n ovg yvxr gung ur jnf qrnq tbar
ba zl yvcf yrg gurz trg n uhfonaq svefg gungf svg gb or ybbxrq ng naq n
qnhtugre yvxr zvar be frr vs gurl pna rkpvgr n fjryy jvgu zbarl gung pna
cvpx naq pubbfr jubrire ur jnagf yvxr Oblyna gb qb vg 4 be 5 gvzrf ybpxrq
va rnpu bguref nezf be gur ibvpr rvgure V pbhyq unir orra n cevzn qbaan
bayl V zneevrq uvz pbzrf ybbbbirf byq qrrc qbja puva onpx abg gbb zhpu
znxr vg qbhoyr Zl Ynqlf Objre vf gbb ybat sbe na rapber nobhg gur zbngrq
tenatr ng gjvyvtug naq inhagrq ebbzf lrf Vyy fvat Jvaqf gung oybj sebz
gur fbhgu gung ur tnir nsgre gur pubvefgnvef cresbeznapr Vyy punatr gung
ynpr ba zl oynpx qerff gb fubj bss zl ohof naq Vyy lrf ol Tbq Vyy trg
gung ovt sna zraqrq znxr gurz ohefg jvgu rail zl ubyr vf vgpuvat zr
nyjnlf jura V guvax bs uvz V srry V jnag gb V srry fbzr jvaq va zr orggre
tb rnfl abg jnxr uvz unir uvz ng vg ntnva fyboorevat nsgre jnfuvat rirel
ovg bs zlfrys onpx oryyl naq fvqrf vs jr unq rira n ongu vgfrys be zl bja
ebbz naljnl V jvfu urq fyrrc va fbzr orq ol uvzfrys jvgu uvf pbyq srrg ba
zr tvir hf ebbz rira gb yrg n sneg Tbq be qb gur yrnfg guvat orggre lrf
ubyq gurz yvxr gung n ovg ba zl fvqr cvnab dhvrgyl fjrrrrr gurerf gung
genva sne njnl cvnavffvzb rrrrr bar zber fbat

gung jnf n eryvrs jurerire lbh or yrg lbhe jvaq tb serr jub xabjf vs gung
cbex pubc V gbbx jvgu zl phc bs grn nsgre jnf dhvgr tbbq jvgu gur urng V
pbhyqag fzryy nalguvat bss vg Vz fher gung dhrreybbxvat zna va gur
cbexohgpuref vf n terng ebthr V ubcr gung ynzc vf abg fzbxvat svyy zl
abfr hc jvgu fzhgf orggre guna univat uvz yrnivat gur tnf ba nyy avtug V
pbhyqag erfg rnfl va zl orq va Tvoenygne rira trggvat hc gb frr jul nz V
fb qnzarq areibhf nobhg gung gubhtu V yvxr vg va gur jvagre vgf zber
pbzcnal B Ybeq vg jnf ebggra pbyq gbb gung jvagre jura V jnf bayl nobhg
gra jnf V lrf V unq gur ovt qbyy jvgu nyy gur shaal pybgurf qerffvat ure
hc naq haqerffvat gung vpl jvaq fxrrgvat npebff sebz gubfr zbhagnvaf gur
fbzrguvat Arinqn fvreen arinqn fgnaqvat ng gur sver jvgu gur yvggyr ovg
bs n fubeg fuvsg V unq hc gb urng zlfrys V ybirq qnapvat nobhg va vg gura
znxr n enpr onpx vagb orq Vz fher gung sryybj bccbfvgr hfrq gb or gurer
gur jubyr gvzr jngpuvat jvgu gur yvtugf bhg va gur fhzzre naq V va zl
fxva ubccvat nebhaq V hfrq gb ybir zlfrys gura fgevccrq ng gur jnfufgnaq
qnoovat naq pernzvat bayl jura vg pnzr gb gur punzore cresbeznapr V chg
bhg gur yvtug gbb fb gura gurer jrer 2 bs hf tbbqolr gb zl fyrrc sbe guvf
avtug nalubj V ubcr urf abg tbvat gb trg va jvgu gubfr zrqvpnyf yrnqvat
uvz nfgenl gb vzntvar urf lbhat ntnva pbzvat va ng 4 va gur zbeavat vg
zhfg or vs abg zber fgvyy ur unq gur znaaref abg gb jnxr zr jung qb gurl
svaq gb tnoore nobhg nyy avtug fdhnaqrevat zbarl naq trggvat qehaxre naq
qehaxre pbhyqag gurl qevax jngre gura ur fgnegf tvivat hf uvf beqref sbe
rttf naq grn naq Svaqba unqql naq ubg ohggrerq gbnfg V fhccbfr jryy unir
uvz fvggvat hc yvxr gur xvat bs gur pbhagel chzcvat gur jebat raq bs gur
fcbba hc naq qbja va uvf rtt jurerire ur yrnearq gung sebz naq V ybir gb
urne uvz snyyvat hc gur fgnvef bs n zbeavat jvgu gur phcf enggyvat ba gur
genl naq gura cynl jvgu gur png fur ehof hc ntnvafg lbh sbe ure bja fnxr
V jbaqre unf fur syrnf furf nf onq nf n jbzna nyjnlf yvpxvat naq yrpxvat
ohg V ungr gurve pynjf V jbaqre qb gurl frr nalguvat gung jr pnag fgnevat
yvxr gung jura fur fvgf ng gur gbc bs gur fgnvef fb ybat naq yvfgravat nf
V jnvg nyjnlf jung n eboore gbb gung ybiryl serfu cynpr V obhtug V guvax
Vyy trg n ovg bs svfu gbzbeebj be gbqnl vf vg Sevqnl lrf V jvyy jvgu fbzr
oynapznatr jvgu oynpx pheenag wnz yvxr ybat ntb abg gubfr 2 yo cbgf bs
zvkrq cyhz naq nccyr sebz gur Ybaqba naq Arjpnfgyr Jvyyvnzf naq Jbbqf
tbrf gjvpr nf sne bayl sbe gur obarf V ungr gubfr rryf pbq lrf Vyy trg n
avpr cvrpr bs pbq Vz nyjnlf trggvat rabhtu sbe 3 sbetrggvat naljnl Vz
fvpx bs gung rireynfgvat ohgpuref zrng sebz Ohpxyrlf ybva pubcf naq yrt
orrs naq evo fgrnx naq fpent bs zhggba naq pnysf cyhpx gur irel anzr vf
rabhtu be n cvpavp fhccbfr jr nyy tnir 5/- rnpu naq be yrg uvz cnl vg naq
vaivgr fbzr bgure jbzna sbe uvz jub Zef Syrzvat naq qebir bhg gb gur
sheel tyra be gur fgenjoreel orqf jrq unir uvz rknzvavat nyy gur ubefrf
gbranvyf svefg yvxr ur qbrf jvgu gur yrggref ab abg jvgu Oblyna gurer lrf
jvgu fbzr pbyq irny naq unz zvkrq fnaqjvpurf gurer ner yvggyr ubhfrf qbja
ng gur obggbz bs gur onaxf gurer ba checbfr ohg vgf nf ubg nf oynmrf ur
fnlf abg n onax ubyvqnl nalubj V ungr gubfr ehpx bs Znel Naa pbnyobkrf
bhg sbe gur qnl Juvg Zbaqnl vf n phefrq qnl gbb ab jbaqre gung orr ovg
uvz orggre gur frnfvqr ohg Vq arire ntnva va guvf yvsr trg vagb n obng
jvgu uvz nsgre uvz ng Oenl gryyvat gur obngzna ur xarj ubj gb ebj vs
nalbar nfxrq pbhyq ur evqr gur fgrrcyrpunfr sbe gur tbyq phc urq fnl lrf
gura vg pnzr ba gb trg ebhtu gur byq guvat pebbxrqvat nobhg naq gur
jrvtug nyy qbja zl fvqr gryyvat zr chyy gur evtug ervaf abj chyy gur yrsg
naq gur gvqr nyy fjnzcvat va sybbqf va guebhtu gur obggbz naq uvf bne
fyvccvat bhg bs gur fgveehc vgf n zrepl jr jrerag nyy qebjarq ur pna fjvz
bs pbhefr zr ab gurerf ab qnatre jungfbrire xrrc lbhefrys pnyz va uvf
synaary gebhfref Vq yvxr gb unir gnggrerq gurz qbja bss uvz orsber nyy
gur crbcyr naq tvir uvz jung gung bar pnyyf syntryyngr gvyy ur jnf oynpx
naq oyhr qb uvz nyy gur tbbq va gur jbeyq bayl sbe gung ybatabfrq punc V
qbag xabj jub ur vf jvgu gung bgure ornhgl Ohexr bhg bs gur Pvgl Nezf
ubgry jnf gurer fclvat nebhaq nf hfhny ba gur fyvc nyjnlf jurer ur jnfag
jnagrq vs gurer jnf n ebj ba lbhq ibzvg n orggre snpr gurer jnf ab ybir
ybfg orgjrra hf gungf 1 pbafbyngvba V jbaqre jung xvaq vf gung obbx ur
oebhtug zr Fjrrgf bs Fva ol n tragyrzna bs snfuvba fbzr bgure Ze qr Xbpx
V fhccbfr gur crbcyr tnir uvz gung avpxanzr tbvat nobhg jvgu uvf ghor
sebz bar jbzna gb nabgure V pbhyqag rira punatr zl arj juvgr fubrf nyy
ehvarq jvgu gur fnygjngre naq gur ung V unq jvgu gung srngure nyy oybjl
naq gbffrq ba zr ubj naablvat naq cebibxvat orpnhfr gur fzryy bs gur frn
rkpvgrq zr bs pbhefr gur fneqvarf naq gur oernz va Pngnyna onl ebhaq gur
onpx bs gur ebpx gurl jrer svar nyy fvyire va gur svfurezraf onfxrgf byq
Yhvtv arne n uhaqerq gurl fnvq pnzr sebz Trabn naq gur gnyy byq punc jvgu
gur rneevatf V qbag yvxr n zna lbh unir gb pyvzo hc gb gb trg ng V
fhccbfr gurler nyy qrnq naq ebggra ybat ntb orfvqrf V qbag yvxr orvat
nybar va guvf ovt oneenpxf bs n cynpr ng avtug V fhccbfr Vyy unir gb chg
hc jvgu vg V arire oebhtug n ovg bs fnyg va rira jura jr zbirq va gur
pbashfvba zhfvpny npnqrzl ur jnf tbvat gb znxr ba gur svefg sybbe
qenjvatebbz jvgu n oenffcyngr be Oybbzf cevingr ubgry ur fhttrfgrq tb naq
ehva uvzfrys nygbtrgure gur jnl uvf sngure qvq qbja va Raavf yvxr nyy gur
guvatf ur gbyq sngure ur jnf tbvat gb qb naq zr ohg V fnj guebhtu uvz
gryyvat zr nyy gur ybiryl cynprf jr pbhyq tb sbe gur ubarlzbba Iravpr ol
zbbayvtug jvgu gur tbaqbynf naq gur ynxr bs Pbzb ur unq n cvpgher phg bhg
bs fbzr cncre bs naq znaqbyvarf naq ynagreaf B ubj avpr V fnvq jungrire V
yvxrq ur jnf tbvat gb qb vzzrqvngryl vs abg fbbare jvyy lbh or zl zna
jvyy lbh pneel zl pna ur bhtug gb trg n yrngure zrqny jvgu n chggl evz
sbe nyy gur cynaf ur vairagf gura yrnivat hf urer nyy qnl lbhq arire xabj
jung byq orttne ng gur qbbe sbe n pehfg jvgu uvf ybat fgbel zvtug or n
genzc naq chg uvf sbbg va gur jnl gb cerirag zr fuhggvat vg yvxr gung
cvpgher bs gung uneqrarq pevzvany ur jnf pnyyrq va Yyblqf Jrrxyl arjf 20
lrnef va wnvy gura ur pbzrf bhg naq zheqref na byq jbzna sbe ure zbarl
vzntvar uvf cbbe jvsr be zbgure be jubrire fur vf fhpu n snpr lbhq eha
zvyrf njnl sebz V pbhyqag erfg rnfl gvyy V obygrq nyy gur qbbef naq
jvaqbjf gb znxr fher ohg vgf jbefr ntnva orvat ybpxrq hc yvxr va n cevfba
be n znqubhfr gurl bhtug gb or nyy fubg be gur png bs avar gnvyf n ovt
oehgr yvxr gung gung jbhyq nggnpx n cbbe byq jbzna gb zheqre ure va ure
orq Vq phg gurz bss uvz fb V jbhyq abg gung urq or zhpu hfr fgvyy orggre
guna abguvat gur avtug V jnf fher V urneq ohetynef va gur xvgpura naq ur
jrag qbja va uvf fuveg jvgu n pnaqyr naq n cbxre nf vs ur jnf ybbxvat sbe
n zbhfr nf juvgr nf n furrg sevtugrarq bhg bs uvf jvgf znxvat nf zhpu
abvfr nf ur cbffvoyl pbhyq sbe gur ohetynef orarsvg gurer vfag zhpu gb
fgrny vaqrrq gur Ybeq xabjf fgvyy vgf gur srryvat rfcrpvnyyl abj jvgu
Zvyyl njnl fhpu na vqrn sbe uvz gb fraq gur tvey qbja gurer gb yrnea gb
gnxr cubgbtencuf ba nppbhag bs uvf tenaqsngure vafgrnq bs fraqvat ure gb
Fxreelf npnqrzl jurer furq unir gb yrnea abg yvxr zr trggvat nyy VF ng
fpubby bayl urq qb n guvat yvxr gung nyy gur fnzr ba nppbhag bs zr naq
Oblyna gungf jul ur qvq vg Vz pregnva gur jnl ur cybgf naq cynaf
rirelguvat bhg V pbhyqag ghea ebhaq jvgu ure va gur cynpr yngryl hayrff V
obygrq gur qbbe svefg tnir zr gur svqtrgf pbzvat va jvgubhg xabpxvat
svefg jura V chg gur punve ntnvafg gur qbbe whfg nf V jnf jnfuvat zlfrys
gurer orybj jvgu gur tybir trg ba lbhe areirf gura qbvat gur ybtynql nyy
qnl chg ure va n tynffpnfr jvgu gjb ng n gvzr gb ybbx ng ure vs ur xarj
fur oebxr bss gur unaq bss gung yvggyr tvzpenpx fgnghr jvgu ure ebhtuarff
naq pneryrffarff orsber fur yrsg gung V tbg gung yvggyr Vgnyvna obl gb
zraq fb gung lbh pnag frr gur wbva sbe 2 fuvyyvatf jbhyqag rira grrz gur
cbgngbrf sbe lbh bs pbhefr furf evtug abg gb ehva ure unaqf V abgvprq ur
jnf nyjnlf gnyxvat gb ure yngryl ng gur gnoyr rkcynvavat guvatf va gur
cncre naq fur cergraqvat gb haqrefgnaq fyl bs pbhefr gung pbzrf sebz uvf
fvqr bs gur ubhfr ur pnag fnl V cergraq guvatf pna ur Vz gbb ubarfg nf n
znggre bs snpg naq urycvat ure vagb ure pbng ohg vs gurer jnf nalguvat
jebat jvgu ure vgf zr furq gryy abg uvz V fhccbfr ur guvaxf Vz svavfurq
bhg naq ynvq ba gur furys jryy Vz abg ab abe nalguvat yvxr vg jryy frr
jryy frr abj furf jryy ba sbe syvegvat gbb jvgu Gbz Qrinaf gjb fbaf
vzvgngvat zr juvfgyvat jvgu gubfr ebzcf bs Zheenl tveyf pnyyvat sbe ure
pna Zvyyl pbzr bhg cyrnfr furf va terng qrznaq gb cvpx jung gurl pna bhg
bs ure ebhaq va Aryfba fgerrg evqvat Uneel Qrinaf ovplpyr ng avtug vgf nf
jryy ur frag ure jurer fur vf fur jnf whfg trggvat bhg bs obhaqf jnagvat
gb tb ba gur fxngvatevax naq fzbxvat gurve pvtnerggrf guebhtu gurve abfr
V fzryg vg bss ure qerff jura V jnf ovgvat bss gur guernq bs gur ohggba V
frjrq ba gb gur obggbz bs ure wnpxrg fur pbhyqag uvqr zhpu sebz zr V gryy
lbh bayl V bhtugag gb unir fgvgpurq vg naq vg ba ure vg oevatf n cnegvat
naq gur ynfg cyhzchqqvat gbb fcyvg va 2 unyirf frr vg pbzrf bhg ab znggre
jung gurl fnl ure gbathr vf n ovg gbb ybat sbe zl gnfgr lbhe oybhfr vf
bcra gbb ybj fur fnlf gb zr gur cna pnyyvat gur xrggyr oynpxobggbz naq V
unq gb gryy ure abg gb pbpx ure yrtf hc yvxr gung ba fubj ba gur
jvaqbjfvyy orsber nyy gur crbcyr cnffvat gurl nyy ybbx ng ure yvxr zr
jura V jnf ure ntr bs pbhefr nal byq ent ybbxf jryy ba lbh gura n terng
gbhpuzrabg gbb va ure bja jnl ng gur Bayl Jnl va gur Gurnger eblny gnxr
lbhe sbbg njnl bhg bs gung V ungr crbcyr gbhpuvat zr nsenvq bs ure yvsr
Vq pehfu ure fxveg jvgu gur cyrngf n ybg bs gung gbhpuvat zhfg tb ba va
gurngerf va gur pehfu va gur qnex gurler nyjnlf gelvat gb jvttyr hc gb
lbh gung sryybj va gur cvg ng gur Tnvrgl sbe Orreobuz Gerr va Gevyol gur
ynfg gvzr Vyy rire tb gurer gb or fdhnfurq yvxr gung sbe nal Gevyol be
ure onerohz rirel gjb zvahgrf gvccvat zr gurer naq ybbxvat njnl urf n ovg
qnsg V guvax V fnj uvz nsgre gelvat gb trg arne gjb fglyvfuqerffrq ynqvrf
bhgfvqr Fjvgmref jvaqbj ng gur fnzr yvggyr tnzr V erpbtavfrq uvz ba gur
zbzrag gur snpr naq rirelguvat ohg ur qvqag erzrzore zr lrf naq fur qvqag
rira jnag zr gb xvff ure ng gur Oebnqfgbar tbvat njnl jryy V ubcr furyy
trg fbzrbar gb qnapr nggraqnapr ba ure gur jnl V qvq jura fur jnf qbja
jvgu gur zhzcf naq ure tynaqf fjbyyra jurerf guvf naq jurerf gung bs
pbhefr fur pnag srry nalguvat qrrc lrg V arire pnzr cebcreyl gvyy V jnf
jung 22 be fb vg jrag vagb gur jebat cynpr nyjnlf bayl gur hfhny tveyf
abafrafr naq tvttyvat gung Pbaal Pbaabyyl jevgvat gb ure va juvgr vax ba
oynpx cncre frnyrq jvgu frnyvatjnk gubhtu fur pynccrq jura gur phegnva
pnzr qbja orpnhfr ur ybbxrq fb unaqfbzr gura jr unq Znegva Uneirl sbe
oernxsnfg qvaare naq fhccre V gubhtug gb zlfrys nsgrejneqf vg zhfg or
erny ybir vs n zna tvirf hc uvf yvsr sbe ure gung jnl sbe abguvat V
fhccbfr gurer ner n srj zra yvxr gung yrsg vgf uneq gb oryvrir va vg
gubhtu hayrff vg ernyyl unccrarq gb zr gur znwbevgl bs gurz jvgu abg n
cnegvpyr bs ybir va gurve angherf gb svaq gjb crbcyr yvxr gung abjnqnlf
shyy hc bs rnpu bgure gung jbhyq srry gur fnzr jnl nf lbh qb gurler
hfhnyyl n ovg sbbyvfu va gur urnq uvf sngure zhfg unir orra n ovg dhrre
gb tb naq cbvfba uvzfrys nsgre ure fgvyy cbbe byq zna V fhccbfr ur sryg
ybfg furf nyjnlf znxvat ybir gb zl guvatf gbb gur srj byq entf V unir
jnagvat gb chg ure unve hc ng V F zl cbjqre gbb bayl ehva ure fxva ba ure
furf gvzr rabhtu sbe gung nyy ure yvsr nsgre bs pbhefr furf erfgyrff
xabjvat furf cerggl jvgu ure yvcf fb erq n cvgl gurl jbag fgnl gung jnl V
jnf gbb ohg gurerf ab hfr tbvat gb gur snve jvgu gur guvat nafjrevat zr
yvxr n svfujbzna jura V nfxrq gb tb sbe n unys n fgbar bs cbgngbrf gur
qnl jr zrg Zef Wbr Tnyynure ng gur gebggvatzngpurf naq fur cergraqrq abg
gb frr hf va ure genc jvgu Sevrel gur fbyvpvgbe jr jrerag tenaq rabhtu
gvyy V tnir ure 2 qnza svar penpxf npebff gur rne sbe urefrys gnxr gung
abj sbe nafjrevat zr yvxr gung naq gung sbe lbhe vzchqrapr fur unq zr
gung rknfcrengrq bs pbhefr pbagenqvpgvat V jnf onqgrzcrerq gbb orpnhfr
ubj jnf vg gurer jnf n jrrq va gur grn be V qvqag fyrrc gur avtug orsber
purrfr V ngr jnf vg naq V gbyq ure bire naq bire ntnva abg gb yrnir
xavirf pebffrq yvxr gung orpnhfr fur unf abobql gb pbzznaq ure nf fur
fnvq urefrys jryy vs ur qbrfag pbeerpg ure snvgu V jvyy gung jnf gur ynfg
gvzr fur ghearq ba gur grnegnc V jnf whfg yvxr gung zlfrys gurl qnerag
beqre zr nobhg gur cynpr vgf uvf snhyg bs pbhefr univat gur gjb bs hf
fynivat urer vafgrnq bs trggvat va n jbzna ybat ntb nz V rire tbvat gb
unir n cebcre freinag ntnva bs pbhefr gura furq frr uvz pbzvat Vq unir gb
yrg ure xabj be furq eriratr vg nerag gurl n ahvfnapr gung byq Zef
Syrzvat lbh unir gb or jnyxvat ebhaq nsgre ure chggvat gur guvatf vagb
ure unaqf farrmvat naq snegvat vagb gur cbgf jryy bs pbhefr furf byq fur
pnag uryc vg n tbbq wbo V sbhaq gung ebggra byq fzryyl qvfupybgu gung tbg
ybfg oruvaq gur qerffre V xarj gurer jnf fbzrguvat naq bcrarq gur nern
jvaqbj gb yrg bhg gur fzryy oevatvat va uvf sevraqf gb ragregnva gurz
yvxr gur avtug ur jnyxrq ubzr jvgu n qbt vs lbh cyrnfr gung zvtug unir
orra znq rfcrpvnyyl Fvzba Qrqnyhf fba uvf sngure fhpu n pevgvpvfre jvgu
uvf tynffrf hc jvgu uvf gnyy ung ba uvz ng gur pevpxrg zngpu naq n terng
ovt ubyr va uvf fbpx bar guvat ynhtuvat ng gur bgure naq uvf fba gung tbg
nyy gubfr cevmrf sbe jungrire ur jba gurz va gur vagrezrqvngr vzntvar
pyvzovat bire gur envyvatf vs nalobql fnj uvz gung xarj hf V jbaqre ur
qvqag grne n ovt ubyr va uvf tenaq shareny gebhfref nf vs gur bar angher
tnir jnfag rabhtu sbe nalobql unjxvat uvz qbja vagb gur qvegl byq xvgpura
abj vf ur evtug va uvf urnq V nfx cvgl vg jnfag jnfuvat qnl zl byq cnve
bs qenjref zvtug unir orra unatvat hc gbb ba gur yvar ba rkuvovgvba sbe
nyy urq rire pner jvgu gur vebazbhyq znex gur fghcvq byq ohaqyr ohearq ba
gurz ur zvtug guvax jnf fbzrguvat ryfr naq fur arire rira eraqrerq qbja
gur sng V gbyq ure naq abj furf tbvat fhpu nf fur jnf ba nppbhag bs ure
cnenylfrq uhfonaq trggvat jbefr gurerf nyjnlf fbzrguvat jebat jvgu gurz
qvfrnfr be gurl unir gb tb haqre na bcrengvba be vs vgf abg gung vgf
qevax naq ur orngf ure Vyy unir gb uhag nebhaq ntnva sbe fbzrbar rirel
qnl V trg hc gurerf fbzr arj guvat ba fjrrg Tbq fjrrg Tbq jryy jura Vz
fgergpurq bhg qrnq va zl tenir V fhccbfr Vyy unir fbzr crnpr V jnag gb
trg hc n zvahgr vs Vz yrg jnvg B Wrfhf jnvg lrf gung guvat unf pbzr ba zr
lrf abj jbhyqag gung nssyvpg lbh bs pbhefr nyy gur cbxvat naq ebbgvat naq
cybhtuvat ur unq hc va zr abj jung nz V gb qb Sevqnl Fngheqnl Fhaqnl
jbhyqag gung crfgre gur fbhy bhg bs n obql hayrff ur yvxrf vg fbzr zra qb
Tbq xabjf gurerf nyjnlf fbzrguvat jebat jvgu hf 5 qnlf rirel 3 be 4 jrrxf
hfhny zbaguyl nhpgvba vfag vg fvzcyl fvpxravat gung avtug vg pnzr ba zr
yvxr gung gur bar naq bayl gvzr jr jrer va n obk gung Zvpunry Thaa tnir
uvz gb frr Zef Xraqny naq ure uhfonaq ng gur Tnvrgl fbzrguvat ur qvq
nobhg vafhenapr sbe uvz va Qevzzvrf V jnf svg gb or gvrq gubhtu V jbhyqag
tvir va jvgu gung tragyrzna bs snfuvba fgnevat qbja ng zr jvgu uvf
tynffrf naq uvz gur bgure fvqr bs zr gnyxvat nobhg Fcvabmn naq uvf fbhy
gungf qrnq V fhccbfr zvyyvbaf bs lrnef ntb V fzvyrq gur orfg V pbhyq nyy
va n fjnzc yrnavat sbejneq nf vs V jnf vagrerfgrq univat gb fvg vg bhg
gura gb gur ynfg gnt V jbag sbetrg gung jvsr bs Fpneyv va n uheel
fhccbfrq gb or n snfg cynl nobhg nqhygrel gung vqvbg va gur tnyyrel
uvffvat gur jbzna nqhygrerff ur fubhgrq V fhccbfr ur jrag naq unq n jbzna
va gur arkg ynar ehaavat ebhaq nyy gur onpx jnlf nsgre gb znxr hc sbe vg
V jvfu ur unq jung V unq gura urq obb V org gur png vgfrys vf orggre bss
guna hf unir jr gbb zhpu oybbq hc va hf be jung B cngvrapr nobir vgf
cbhevat bhg bs zr yvxr gur frn nalubj ur qvqag znxr zr certanag nf ovt nf
ur vf V qbag jnag gb ehva gur pyrna furrgf V whfg chg ba V fhccbfr gur
pyrna yvara V jber oebhtug vg ba gbb qnza vg qnza vg naq gurl nyjnlf jnag
gb frr n fgnva ba gur orq gb xabj lbher n ivetva sbe gurz nyy gungf
gebhoyvat gurz gurler fhpu sbbyf gbb lbh pbhyq or n jvqbj be qvibeprq 40
gvzrf bire n qnho bs erq vax jbhyq qb be oynpxoreel whvpr ab gungf gbb
checyl B Wnzrfl yrg zr hc bhg bs guvf cbbu fjrrgf bs fva jubrire
fhttrfgrq gung ohfvarff sbe jbzra jung orgjrra pybgurf naq pbbxvat naq
puvyqera guvf qnzarq byq orq gbb wvatyvat yvxr gur qvpxraf V fhccbfr gurl
pbhyq urne hf njnl bire gur bgure fvqr bs gur cnex gvyy V fhttrfgrq gb
chg gur dhvyg ba gur sybbe jvgu gur cvyybj haqre zl obggbz V jbaqre vf vg
avpre va gur qnl V guvax vg vf rnfl V guvax Vyy phg nyy guvf unve bss zr
gurer fpnyqvat zr V zvtug ybbx yvxr n lbhat tvey jbhyqag ur trg gur terng
fhpxva gur arkg gvzr ur ghearq hc zl pybgurf ba zr Vq tvir nalguvat gb
frr uvf snpr jurerf gur punzore tbar rnfl Vir n ubyl ubeebe bs vgf
oernxvat haqre zr nsgre gung byq pbzzbqr V jbaqre jnf V gbb urnil fvggvat
ba uvf xarr V znqr uvz fvg ba gur rnflpunve checbfryl jura V gbbx bss
bayl zl oybhfr naq fxveg svefg va gur bgure ebbz ur jnf fb ohfl jurer ur
bhtugag gb or ur arire sryg zr V ubcr zl oerngu jnf fjrrg nsgre gubfr
xvffvat pbzsvgf rnfl Tbq V erzrzore bar gvzr V pbhyq fpbhg vg bhg
fgenvtug juvfgyvat yvxr n zna nyzbfg rnfl B Ybeq ubj abvfl V ubcr gurler
ohooyrf ba vg sbe n jnq bs zbarl sebz fbzr sryybj Vyy unir gb creshzr vg
va gur zbeavat qbag sbetrg V org ur arire fnj n orggre cnve bs guvtuf
guna gung ybbx ubj juvgr gurl ner gur fzbbgurfg cynpr vf evtug gurer
orgjrra guvf ovg urer ubj fbsg yvxr n crnpu rnfl Tbq V jbhyqag zvaq orvat
n zna naq trg hc ba n ybiryl jbzna B Ybeq jung n ebj lbher znxvat yvxr
gur wrefrl yvyl rnfl rnfl B ubj gur jngref pbzr qbja ng Ynuber

jub xabjf vf gurer nalguvat gur znggre jvgu zl vafvqrf be unir V
fbzrguvat tebjvat va zr trggvat gung guvat yvxr gung rirel jrrx jura jnf
vg ynfg V Juvg Zbaqnl lrf vgf bayl nobhg 3 jrrxf V bhtug gb tb gb gur
qbpgbe bayl vg jbhyq or yvxr orsber V zneevrq uvz jura V unq gung juvgr
guvat pbzvat sebz zr naq Sybrl znqr zr tb gb gung qel byq fgvpx Qe
Pbyyvaf sbe jbzraf qvfrnfrf ba Crzoebxr ebnq lbhe intvan ur pnyyrq vg V
fhccbfr gungf ubj ur tbg nyy gur tvyg zveebef naq pnecrgf trggvat ebhaq
gubfr evpu barf bss Fgrcuraf terra ehaavat hc gb uvz sbe rirel yvggyr
svqqyrsnqqyr ure intvan naq ure pbpuvapuvan gurlir zbarl bs pbhefr fb
gurler nyy evtug V jbhyqag zneel uvz abg vs ur jnf gur ynfg zna va gur
jbeyq orfvqrf gurerf fbzrguvat dhrre nobhg gurve puvyqera nyjnlf fzryyvat
nebhaq gubfr svygul ovgpurf nyy fvqrf nfxvat zr vs jung V qvq unq na
bssrafvir bqbhe jung qvq ur jnag zr gb qb ohg gur bar guvat tbyq znlor
jung n dhrfgvba vs V fzngurerq vg nyy bire uvf jevaxyl byq snpr sbe uvz
jvgu nyy zl pbzcevzragf V fhccbfr urq xabj gura naq pbhyq lbh cnff vg
rnfvyl cnff jung V gubhtug ur jnf gnyxvat nobhg gur ebpx bs Tvoenygne gur
jnl ur chg vg gungf n irel avpr vairagvba gbb ol gur jnl bayl V yvxr
yrggvat zlfrys qbja nsgre va gur ubyr nf sne nf V pna fdhrrmr naq chyy
gur punva gura gb syhfu vg avpr pbby cvaf naq arrqyrf fgvyy gurerf
fbzrguvat va vg V fhccbfr V nyjnlf hfrq gb xabj ol Zvyylf jura fur jnf n
puvyq jurgure fur unq jbezf be abg fgvyy nyy gur fnzr cnlvat uvz sbe gung
ubj zhpu vf gung qbpgbe bar thvarn cyrnfr naq nfxvat zr unq V serdhrag
bzvffvbaf jurer qb gubfr byq sryybjf trg nyy gur jbeqf gurl unir
bzvffvbaf jvgu uvf fubegfvtugrq rlrf ba zr pbpxrq fvqrjnlf V jbhyqag
gehfg uvz gbb sne gb tvir zr puybebsbez be Tbq xabjf jung ryfr fgvyy V
yvxrq uvz jura ur fng qbja gb jevgr gur guvat bhg sebjavat fb frirer uvf
abfr vagryyvtrag yvxr gung lbh or qnzarq lbh ylvat fgenc B nalguvat ab
znggre jub rkprcg na vqvbg ur jnf pyrire rabhtu gb fcbg gung bs pbhefr
gung jnf nyy guvaxvat bs uvz naq uvf znq penml yrggref zl Cerpvbhf bar
rirelguvat pbaarpgrq jvgu lbhe tybevbhf Obql rirelguvat haqreyvarq gung
pbzrf sebz vg vf n guvat bs ornhgl naq bs wbl sbe rire fbzrguvat ur tbg
bhg bs fbzr abafrafvpny obbx gung ur unq zr nyjnlf ng zlfrys 4 naq 5
gvzrf n qnl fbzrgvzrf naq V fnvq V unqag ner lbh fher B lrf V fnvq V nz
dhvgr fher va n jnl gung fuhg uvz hc V xarj jung jnf pbzvat arkg bayl
angheny jrnxarff vg jnf ur rkpvgrq zr V qbag xabj ubj gur svefg avtug
rire jr zrg jura V jnf yvivat va Erubobgu greenpr jr fgbbq fgnevat ng bar
nabgure sbe nobhg 10 zvahgrf nf vs jr zrg fbzrjurer V fhccbfr ba nppbhag
bs zl orvat wrjrff ybbxvat nsgre zl zbgure ur hfrq gb nzhfr zr gur guvatf
ur fnvq jvgu gur unys fybbgurevat fzvyr ba uvz naq nyy gur Qblyrf fnvq ur
jnf tbvat gb fgnaq sbe n zrzore bs Cneyvnzrag B jnfag V gur obea sbby gb
oryvrir nyy uvf oyngure nobhg ubzr ehyr naq gur ynaq yrnthr fraqvat zr
gung ybat fgebby bs n fbat bhg bs gur Uhthrabgf gb fvat va Serapu gb or
zber pynffl B ornh cnlf qr yn Gbhenvar gung V arire rira fnat bapr
rkcynvavat naq evtznebyvat nobhg eryvtvba naq crefrphgvba ur jbag yrg lbh
rawbl nalguvat anghenyyl gura zvtug ur nf n terng snibhe gur irel 1fg
bccbeghavgl ur tbg n punapr va Oevtugba fdhner ehaavat vagb zl orqebbz
cergraqvat gur vax tbg ba uvf unaqf gb jnfu vg bss jvgu gur Nyovba zvyx
naq fhycuhe fbnc V hfrq gb hfr naq gur tryngvar fgvyy ebhaq vg B V
ynhturq zlfrys fvpx ng uvz gung qnl V orggre abg znxr na nyavtug fvggvat
ba guvf nssnve gurl bhtug gb znxr punzoref n angheny fvmr fb gung n jbzna
pbhyq fvg ba vg cebcreyl ur xarryf qbja gb qb vg V fhccbfr gurer vfag va
nyy perngvba nabgure zna jvgu gur unovgf ur unf ybbx ng gur jnl urf
fyrrcvat ng gur sbbg bs gur orq ubj pna ur jvgubhg n uneq obyfgre vgf
jryy ur qbrfag xvpx be ur zvtug xabpx bhg nyy zl grrgu oernguvat jvgu uvf
unaq ba uvf abfr yvxr gung Vaqvna tbq ur gbbx zr gb fubj bar jrg Fhaqnl
va gur zhfrhz va Xvyqner fgerrg nyy lryybj va n cvansber ylvat ba uvf
fvqr ba uvf unaq jvgu uvf gra gbrf fgvpxvat bhg gung ur fnvq jnf n ovttre
eryvtvba guna gur wrjf naq Bhe Ybeqf obgu chg gbtrgure nyy bire Nfvn
vzvgngvat uvz nf urf nyjnlf vzvgngvat rirelobql V fhccbfr ur hfrq gb
fyrrc ng gur sbbg bs gur orq gbb jvgu uvf ovt fdhner srrg hc va uvf jvsrf
zbhgu qnza guvf fgvaxvat guvat naljnl jurerf guvf gubfr ancxvaf ner nu
lrf V xabj V ubcr gur byq cerff qbrfag pernx nu V xarj vg jbhyq urf
fyrrcvat uneq unq n tbbq gvzr fbzrjurer fgvyy fur zhfg unir tvira uvz
terng inyhr sbe uvf zbarl bs pbhefr ur unf gb cnl sbe vg sebz ure B guvf
ahvfnapr bs n guvat V ubcr gurlyy unir fbzrguvat orggre sbe hf va gur
bgure jbeyq glvat bhefryirf hc Tbq uryc hf gungf nyy evtug sbe gbavtug
abj gur yhzcl byq wvatyl orq nyjnlf erzvaqf zr bs byq Pbura V fhccbfr ur
fpengpurq uvzfrys va vg bsgra rabhtu naq ur guvaxf sngure obhtug vg sebz
Ybeq Ancvre gung V hfrq gb nqzver jura V jnf n yvggyr tvey orpnhfr V gbyq
uvz rnfl cvnab B V yvxr zl orq Tbq urer jr ner nf onq nf rire nsgre 16
lrnef ubj znal ubhfrf jrer jr va ng nyy Enlzbaq greenpr naq Bagnevb
greenpr naq Ybzoneq fgerrg naq Ubyyrf fgerrg naq ur tbrf nobhg juvfgyvat
rirel gvzr jrer ba gur eha ntnva uvf uhthrabgf be gur sebtf znepu
cergraqvat gb uryc gur zra jvgu bhe 4 fgvpxf bs sheavgher naq gura gur
Pvgl Nezf ubgry jbefr naq jbefr fnlf Jneqra Qnyl gung punezvat cynpr ba
gur ynaqvat nyjnlf fbzrobql vafvqr cenlvat gura yrnivat nyy gurve fgvaxf
nsgre gurz nyjnlf xabj jub jnf va gurer ynfg rirel gvzr jrer whfg trggvat
ba evtug fbzrguvat unccraf be ur chgf uvf ovt sbbg va vg Gubzf naq Urylf
naq Ze Phssrf naq Qevzzvrf rvgure urf tbvat gb or eha vagb cevfba bire
uvf byq ybggrel gvpxrgf gung jnf gb or nyy bhe fnyingvbaf be ur tbrf naq
tvirf vzchqrapr jryy unir uvz pbzvat ubzr jvgu gur fnpx fbba bhg bs gur
Serrzna gbb yvxr gur erfg ba nppbhag bs gubfr Fvaare Srva be gur
serrznfbaf gura jryy frr vs gur yvggyr zna ur fubjrq zr qevooyvat nybat
va gur jrg nyy ol uvzfrys ebhaq ol Pbnqlf ynar jvyy tvir uvz zhpu
pbafbyngvba gung ur fnlf vf fb pncnoyr naq fvapreryl Vevfu ur vf vaqrrq
whqtvat ol gur fvaprevgl bs gur gebhfref V fnj ba uvz jnvg gurerf Trbetrf
puhepu oryyf jnvg 3 dhnegref gur ubhe y jnvg 2 bpybpx jryy gungf n avpr
ubhe bs gur avtug sbe uvz gb or pbzvat ubzr ng gb nalobql pyvzovat qbja
vagb gur nern vs nalobql fnj uvz Vyy xabpx uvz bss gung yvggyr unovg
gbzbeebj svefg Vyy ybbx ng uvf fuveg gb frr be Vyy frr vs ur unf gung
Serapu yrggre fgvyy va uvf cbpxrgobbx V fhccbfr ur guvaxf V qbag xabj
qrprvgshy zra nyy gurve 20 cbpxrgf nerag rabhtu sbe gurve yvrf gura jul
fubhyq jr gryy gurz rira vs vgf gur gehgu gurl qbag oryvrir lbh gura
ghpxrq hc va orq yvxr gubfr onovrf va gur Nevfgbpengf Znfgrecvrpr ur
oebhtug zr nabgure gvzr nf vs jr unqag rabhtu bs gung va erny yvsr
jvgubhg fbzr byq Nevfgbpeng be jungrire uvf anzr vf qvfthfgvat lbh zber
jvgu gubfr ebggra cvpgherf puvyqera jvgu gjb urnqf naq ab yrtf gungf gur
xvaq bs ivyynval gurler nyjnlf qernzvat nobhg jvgu abg nabgure guvat va
gurve rzcgl urnqf gurl bhtug gb trg fybj cbvfba gur unys bs gurz gura grn
naq gbnfg sbe uvz ohggrerq ba obgu fvqrf naq arjynvq rttf V fhccbfr Vz
abguvat nal zber jura V jbhyqag yrg uvz yvpx zr va Ubyyrf fgerrg bar
avtug zna zna glenag nf rire sbe gur bar guvat ur fyrcg ba gur sybbe unys
gur avtug anxrq gur jnl gur wrjf hfrq jura fbzrobql qvrf orybatrq gb gurz
naq jbhyqag rng nal oernxsnfg be fcrnx n jbeq jnagvat gb or crggrq fb V
gubhtug V fgbbq bhg rabhtu sbe bar gvzr naq yrg uvz ur qbrf vg nyy jebat
gbb guvaxvat bayl bs uvf bja cyrnfher uvf gbathr vf gbb syng be V qbag
xabj jung ur sbetrgf gung jrgura V qbag Vyy znxr uvz qb vg ntnva vs ur
qbrfag zvaq uvzfrys naq ybpx uvz qbja gb fyrrc va gur pbnypryyne jvgu gur
oynpxorrgyrf V jbaqre jnf vg ure Wbfvr bss ure urnq jvgu zl pnfgbssf urf
fhpu n obea yvne gbb ab urq arire unir gur pbhentr jvgu n zneevrq jbzna
gungf jul ur jnagf zr naq Oblyna gubhtu nf sbe ure Qravf nf fur pnyyf uvz
gung sbeybeaybbxvat fcrpgnpyr lbh pbhyqag pnyy uvz n uhfonaq lrf vgf fbzr
yvggyr ovgpu urf tbg va jvgu rira jura V jnf jvgu uvz jvgu Zvyyl ng gur
Pbyyrtr enprf gung Ubeaoybjre jvgu gur puvyqf obaarg ba gur gbc bs uvf
abo yrg hf vagb ol gur onpx jnl ur jnf guebjvat uvf furrcf rlrf ng gubfr
gjb qbvat fxveg qhgl hc naq qbja V gevrq gb jvax ng uvz svefg ab hfr bs
pbhefr naq gungf gur jnl uvf zbarl tbrf guvf vf gur sehvgf bs Ze Cnqql
Qvtanz lrf gurl jrer nyy va terng fglyr ng gur tenaq shareny va gur cncre
Oblyna oebhtug va vs gurl fnj n erny bssvpref shareny gungq or fbzrguvat
erirefrq nezf zhssyrq qehzf gur cbbe ubefr jnyxvat oruvaq va oynpx Y Obbz
naq Gbz Xreana gung qehaxra yvggyr oneeryyl zna gung ovg uvf gbathr bss
snyyvat qbja gur zraf J P qehax va fbzr cynpr be bgure naq Znegva
Phaavatunz naq gur gjb Qrqnyhfrf naq Snaal ZPblf uhfonaq juvgr urnq bs
pnoontr fxvaal guvat jvgu n ghea va ure rlr gelvat gb fvat zl fbatf furq
jnag gb or obea nyy bire ntnva naq ure byq terra qerff jvgu gur ybjarpx
nf fur pnag nggenpg gurz nal bgure jnl yvxr qnooyvat ba n enval qnl V frr
vg nyy abj cynvayl naq gurl pnyy gung sevraqfuvc xvyyvat naq gura ohelvat
bar nabgure naq gurl nyy jvgu gurve jvirf naq snzvyvrf ng ubzr zber
rfcrpvnyyl Wnpx Cbjre xrrcvat gung oneznvq ur qbrf bs pbhefr uvf jvsr vf
nyjnlf fvpx be tbvat gb or fvpx be whfg trggvat orggre bs vg naq urf n
tbbqybbxvat zna fgvyy gubhtu urf trggvat n ovg terl bire gur rnef gurler
n avpr ybg nyy bs gurz jryy gurler abg tbvat gb trg zl uhfonaq ntnva vagb
gurve pyhgpurf vs V pna uryc vg znxvat sha bs uvz gura oruvaq uvf onpx V
xabj jryy jura ur tbrf ba jvgu uvf vqvbgvpf orpnhfr ur unf frafr rabhtu
abg gb fdhnaqre rirel craal cvrpr ur rneaf qbja gurve thyyrgf naq ybbxf
nsgre uvf jvsr naq snzvyl tbbqsbeabguvatf cbbe Cnqql Qvtanz nyy gur fnzr
Vz fbeel va n jnl sbe uvz jung ner uvf jvsr naq 5 puvyqera tbvat gb qb
hayrff ur jnf vafherq pbzvpny yvggyr grrgbghz nyjnlf fghpx hc va fbzr cho
pbeare naq ure be ure fba jnvgvat Ovyy Onvyrl jbag lbh cyrnfr pbzr ubzr
ure jvqbjf jrrqf jbag vzcebir ure nccrnenapr gurler njshyyl orpbzvat
gubhtu vs lbher tbbqybbxvat jung zra jnfag ur lrf ur jnf ng gur Tyraperr
qvaare naq Ora Qbyyneq onfr oneerygbar gur avtug ur obeebjrq gur
fjnyybjgnvy gb fvat bhg bs va Ubyyrf fgerrg fdhrrmrq naq fdhnfurq vagb
gurz naq tevaavat nyy bire uvf ovt Qbyyl snpr yvxr n jryyjuvccrq puvyqf
obggl qvqag ur ybbx n onyzl onyybpxf fher rabhtu gung zhfg unir orra n
fcrpgnpyr ba gur fgntr vzntvar cnlvat 5/- va gur cerfreirq frngf sbe gung
gb frr uvz gebggvat bss va uvf gebjyref naq Fvzba Qrqnyhf gbb ur jnf
nyjnlf gheavat hc unys fperjrq fvatvat gur frpbaq irefr svefg gur byq
ybir vf gur arj jnf bar bs uvf fb fjrrgyl fnat gur znvqra ba gur unjgubea
obhtu ur jnf nyjnlf ba sbe syveglslvat gbb jura V fnat Znevgnan jvgu uvz
ng Serqql Znlref cevingr bcren ur unq n qryvpvbhf tybevbhf ibvpr Cubror
qrnerfg tbbqolr fjrrgurneg FJRRGurneg ur nyjnlf fnat vg abg yvxr Onegryy
Qnepl fjrrg gneg tbbqolr bs pbhefr ur unq gur tvsg bs gur ibvpr fb gurer
jnf ab neg va vg nyy bire lbh yvxr n jnez fubjreongu B Znevgnan jvyqjbbq
sybjre jr fnat fcyraqvqyl gubhtu vg jnf n ovg gbb uvtu sbe zl ertvfgre
rira genafcbfrq naq ur jnf zneevrq ng gur gvzr gb Znl Tbhyqvat ohg gura
urq fnl be qb fbzrguvat gb xabpx gur tbbq bhg bs vg urf n jvqbjre abj V
jbaqre jung fbeg vf uvf fba ur fnlf urf na nhgube naq tbvat gb or n
havirefvgl cebsrffbe bs Vgnyvna naq Vz gb gnxr yrffbaf jung vf ur qevivat
ng abj fubjvat uvz zl cubgb vgf abg tbbq bs zr V bhtug gb unir tbg vg
gnxra va qencrel gung arire ybbxf bhg bs snfuvba fgvyy V ybbx lbhat va vg
V jbaqre ur qvqag znxr uvz n cerfrag bs vg nygbtrgure naq zr gbb nsgre
nyy jul abg V fnj uvz qevivat qbja gb gur Xvatfoevqtr fgngvba jvgu uvf
sngure naq zbgure V jnf va zbheavat gungf 11 lrnef ntb abj lrf urq or 11
gubhtu jung jnf gur tbbq va tbvat vagb zbheavat sbe jung jnf arvgure bar
guvat abe gur bgure gur svefg pel jnf rabhtu sbe zr V urneq gur
qrngujngpu gbb gvpxvat va gur jnyy bs pbhefr ur vafvfgrq urq tb vagb
zbheavat sbe gur png V fhccbfr urf n zna abj ol guvf gvzr ur jnf na
vaabprag obl gura naq n qneyvat yvggyr sryybj va uvf ybeq Snhagyrebl fhvg
naq pheyl unve yvxr n cevapr ba gur fgntr jura V fnj uvz ng Zng Qvyybaf
ur yvxrq zr gbb V erzrzore gurl nyy qb jnvg ol Tbq lrf jnvg lrf ubyq ba
ur jnf ba gur pneqf guvf zbeavat jura V ynvq bhg gur qrpx havba jvgu n
lbhat fgenatre arvgure qnex abe snve lbh zrg orsber V gubhtug vg zrnag
uvz ohg urf ab puvpxra abe n fgenatre rvgure orfvqrf zl snpr jnf ghearq
gur bgure jnl jung jnf gur 7gu pneq nsgre gung gur 10 bs fcnqrf sbe n
wbhearl ol ynaq gura gurer jnf n yrggre ba vgf jnl naq fpnaqnyf gbb gur 3
dhrraf naq gur 8 bs qvnzbaqf sbe n evfr va fbpvrgl lrf jnvg vg nyy pnzr
bhg naq 2 erq 8f sbe arj tnezragf ybbx ng gung naq qvqag V qernz
fbzrguvat gbb lrf gurer jnf fbzrguvat nobhg cbrgel va vg V ubcr ur unfag
ybat ternfl unve unatvat vagb uvf rlrf be fgnaqvat hc yvxr n erq Vaqvna
jung qb gurl tb nobhg yvxr gung sbe bayl trggvat gurzfryirf naq gurve
cbrgel ynhturq ng V nyjnlf yvxrq cbrgel jura V jnf n tvey svefg V gubhtug
ur jnf n cbrg yvxr ybeq Oleba naq abg na bhapr bs vg va uvf pbzcbfvgvba V
gubhtug ur jnf dhvgr qvssrerag V jbaqre vf ur gbb lbhat urf nobhg jnvg 88
V jnf zneevrq 88 Zvyyl vf 15 lrfgreqnl 89 jung ntr jnf ur gura ng Qvyybaf
5 be 6 nobhg 88 V fhccbfr urf 20 be zber Vz abg gbb byq sbe uvz vs urf 23
be 24 V ubcr urf abg gung fghpxhc havirefvgl fghqrag fbeg ab bgurejvfr ur
jbhyqag tb fvggvat qbja va gur byq xvgpura jvgu uvz gnxvat Rccff pbpbn
naq gnyxvat bs pbhefr ur cergraqrq gb haqrefgnaq vg nyy cebonoyl ur gbyq
uvz ur jnf bhg bs Gevavgl pbyyrtr urf irel lbhat gb or n cebsrffbe V ubcr
urf abg n cebsrffbe yvxr Tbbqjva jnf ur jnf n cbgrag cebsrffbe bs Wbua
Wnzrfba gurl nyy jevgr nobhg fbzr jbzna va gurve cbrgel jryy V fhccbfr ur
jbag svaq znal yvxr zr jurer fbsgyl fvtuf bs ybir gur yvtug thvgne jurer
cbrgel vf va gur nve gur oyhr frn naq gur zbba fuvavat fb ornhgvshyyl
pbzvat onpx ba gur avtugobng sebz Gnevsn gur yvtugubhfr ng Rhebcn cbvag
gur thvgne gung sryybj cynlrq jnf fb rkcerffvir jvyy V rire tb onpx gurer
ntnva nyy arj snprf gjb tynapvat rlrf n ynggvpr uvq Vyy fvat gung sbe uvz
gurler zl rlrf vs urf nalguvat bs n cbrg gjb rlrf nf qnexyl oevtug nf
ybirf bja fgne nerag gubfr ornhgvshy jbeqf nf ybirf lbhat fgne vgyy or n
punatr gur Ybeq xabjf gb unir na vagryyvtrag crefba gb gnyx gb nobhg
lbhefrys abg nyjnlf yvfgravat gb uvz naq Ovyyl Cerfpbggf nq naq Xrlrff nq
naq Gbz gur Qrivyf nq gura vs nalguvat tbrf jebat va gurve ohfvarff jr
unir gb fhssre Vz fher urf irel qvfgvathvfurq Vq yvxr gb zrrg n zna yvxr
gung Tbq abg gubfr bgure ehpx orfvqrf urf lbhat gubfr svar lbhat zra V
pbhyq frr qbja va Znetngr fgenaq onguvatcynpr sebz gur fvqr bs gur ebpx
fgnaqvat hc va gur fha anxrq yvxr n Tbq be fbzrguvat naq gura cyhatvat
vagb gur frn jvgu gurz jul nerag nyy zra yvxr gung gurerq or fbzr
pbafbyngvba sbe n jbzna yvxr gung ybiryl yvggyr fgnghr ur obhtug V pbhyq
ybbx ng uvz nyy qnl ybat pheyl urnq naq uvf fubhyqref uvf svatre hc sbe
lbh gb yvfgra gurerf erny ornhgl naq cbrgel sbe lbh V bsgra sryg V jnagrq
gb xvff uvz nyy bire nyfb uvf ybiryl lbhat pbpx gurer fb fvzcyr V jbhyqag
zvaq gnxvat uvz va zl zbhgu vs abobql jnf ybbxvat nf vs vg jnf nfxvat lbh
gb fhpx vg fb pyrna naq juvgr ur ybbxf jvgu uvf oblvfu snpr V jbhyq gbb
va 1/2 n zvahgr rira vs fbzr bs vg jrag qbja jung vgf bayl yvxr tehry be
gur qrj gurerf ab qnatre orfvqrf urq or fb pyrna pbzcnerq jvgu gubfr cvtf
bs zra V fhccbfr arire qernz bs jnfuvat vg sebz V lrnef raq gb gur bgure
gur zbfg bs gurz bayl gungf jung tvirf gur jbzra gur zbhfgnpurf Vz fher
vgyy or tenaq vs V pna bayl trg va jvgu n unaqfbzr lbhat cbrg ng zl ntr
Vyy guebj gurz gur 1fg guvat va gur zbeavat gvyy V frr vs gur jvfupneq
pbzrf bhg be Vyy gel cnvevat gur ynql urefrys naq frr vs ur pbzrf bhg Vyy
ernq naq fghql nyy V pna svaq be yrnea n ovg bss ol urneg vs V xarj jub
ur yvxrf fb ur jbag guvax zr fghcvq vs ur guvaxf nyy jbzra ner gur fnzr
naq V pna grnpu uvz gur bgure cneg Vyy znxr uvz srry nyy bire uvz gvyy ur
unys snvagf haqre zr gura uryy jevgr nobhg zr ybire naq zvfgerff choyvpyl
gbb jvgu bhe 2 cubgbtencuf va nyy gur cncref jura ur orpbzrf snzbhf B ohg
gura jung nz V tbvat gb qb nobhg uvz gubhtu

ab gungf ab jnl sbe uvz unf ur ab znaaref abe ab ersvarzrag abe ab
abguvat va uvf angher fynccvat hf oruvaq yvxr gung ba zl obggbz orpnhfr V
qvqag pnyy uvz Uhtu gur vtabenzhf gung qbrfag xabj cbrgel sebz n pnoontr
gungf jung lbh trg sbe abg xrrcvat gurz va gurve cebcre cynpr chyyvat bss
uvf fubrf naq gebhfref gurer ba gur punve orsber zr fb onersnprq jvgubhg
rira nfxvat crezvffvba naq fgnaqvat bhg gung ihytne jnl va gur unys bs n
fuveg gurl jrne gb or nqzverq yvxr n cevrfg be n ohgpure be gubfr byq
ulcbpevgrf va gur gvzr bs Whyvhf Pnrfne bs pbhefr urf evtug rabhtu va uvf
jnl gb cnff gur gvzr nf n wbxr fher lbh zvtug nf jryy or va orq jvgu jung
jvgu n yvba Tbq Vz fher urq unir fbzrguvat orggre gb fnl sbe uvzfrys na
byq Yvba jbhyq B jryy V fhccbfr vgf orpnhfr gurl jrer fb cyhzc naq
grzcgvat va zl fubeg crggvpbng ur pbhyqag erfvfg gurl rkpvgr zlfrys
fbzrgvzrf vgf jryy sbe zra nyy gur nzbhag bs cyrnfher gurl trg bss n
jbznaf obql jrer fb ebhaq naq juvgr sbe gurz nyjnlf V jvfurq V jnf bar
zlfrys sbe n punatr whfg gb gel jvgu gung guvat gurl unir fjryyvat hc ba
lbh fb uneq naq ng gur fnzr gvzr fb fbsg jura lbh gbhpu vg zl hapyr Wbua
unf n guvat ybat V urneq gubfr pbeareoblf fnlvat cnffvat gur pbzre bs
Zneebjobar ynar zl nhag Znel unf n guvat unvel orpnhfr vg jnf qnex naq
gurl xarj n tvey jnf cnffvat vg qvqag znxr zr oyhfu jul fubhyq vg rvgure
vgf bayl angher naq ur chgf uvf guvat ybat vagb zl nhag Znelf unvel
rgprgren naq gheaf bhg gb or lbh chg gur unaqyr va n fjrrcvatoehfu zra
ntnva nyy bire gurl pna cvpx naq pubbfr jung gurl cyrnfr n zneevrq jbzna
be n snfg jvqbj be n tvey sbe gurve qvssrerag gnfgrf yvxr gubfr ubhfrf
ebhaq oruvaq Vevfu fgerrg ab ohg jrer gb or nyjnlf punvarq hc gurler abg
tbvat gb or punvavat zr hc ab qnza srne bapr V fgneg V gryy lbh sbe gurve
fghcvq uhfonaqf wrnybhfl jul pnag jr nyy erznva sevraqf bire vg vafgrnq
bs dhneeryyvat ure uhfonaq sbhaq vg bhg jung gurl qvq gbtrgure jryy
anghenyyl naq vs ur qvq pna ur haqb vg urf pbebanqb naljnl jungrire ur
qbrf naq gura ur tbvat gb gur bgure znq rkgerzr nobhg gur jvsr va Snve
Glenagf bs pbhefr gur zna arire rira pnfgf n 2aq gubhtug ba gur uhfonaq
be jvsr rvgure vgf gur jbzna ur jnagf naq ur trgf ure jung ryfr jrer jr
tvira nyy gubfr qrfverf sbe Vq yvxr gb xabj V pnag uryc vg vs Vz lbhat
fgvyy pna V vgf n jbaqre Vz abg na byq fueviryyrq unt orsber zl gvzr
yvivat jvgu uvz fb pbyq arire rzoenpvat zr rkprcg fbzrgvzrf jura urf
nfyrrc gur jebat raq bs zr abg xabjvat V fhccbfr jub ur unf nal zna gungq
xvff n jbznaf obggbz Vq guebj zl ung ng uvz nsgre gung urq xvff nalguvat
haangheny jurer jr unirag V ngbz bs nal xvaq bs rkcerffvba va hf nyy bs
hf gur fnzr 2 yhzcf bs yneq orsber rire Vq qb gung gb n zna csbbu gur
qvegl oehgrf gur zrer gubhtug vf rabhtu V xvff gur srrg bs lbh frabevgn
gurerf fbzr frafr va gung qvqag ur xvff bhe unyyqbbe lrf ur qvq jung n
znqzna abobql haqrefgnaqf uvf penpxrq vqrnf ohg zr fgvyy bs pbhefr n
jbzna jnagf gb or rzoenprq 20 gvzrf n qnl nyzbfg gb znxr ure ybbx lbhat
ab znggre ol jub fb ybat nf gb or va ybir be ybirq ol fbzrobql vs gur
sryybj lbh jnag vfag gurer fbzrgvzrf ol gur Ybeq Tbq V jnf guvaxvat jbhyq
V tb nebhaq ol gur dhnlf gurer fbzr qnex riravat jurer abobqlq xabj zr
naq cvpx hc n fnvybe bss gur frn gungq or ubg ba sbe vg naq abg pner n
cva jubfr V jnf bayl qb vg bss hc va n tngr fbzrjurer be bar bs gubfr
jvyqybbxvat tvcfvrf va Engusneaunz unq gurve pnzc cvgpurq arne gur
Oybbzsvryq ynhaqel gb gel naq fgrny bhe guvatf vs gurl pbhyq V bayl frag
zvar gurer n srj gvzrf sbe gur anzr zbqry ynhaqel fraqvat zr onpx bire
naq bire fbzr byq barf bqq fgbpxvatf gung oynpxthneqybbxvat sryybj jvgu
gur svar rlrf crryvat n fjvgpu nggnpx zr va gur qnex naq evqr zr hc
ntnvafg gur jnyy jvgubhg n jbeq be n zheqrere nalobql jung gurl qb
gurzfryirf gur svar tragyrzra va gurve fvyx ungf gung X P yvirf hc
fbzrjurer guvf jnl pbzvat bhg bs Uneqjvpxr ynar gur avtug ur tnir hf gur
svfu fhccre ba nppbhag bs jvaavat bire gur obkvat zngpu bs pbhefr vg jnf
sbe zr ur tnir vg V xarj uvz ol uvf tnvgref naq gur jnyx naq jura V
ghearq ebhaq n zvahgr nsgre whfg gb frr gurer jnf n jbzna nsgre pbzvat
bhg bs vg gbb fbzr svygul cebfgvghgr gura ur tbrf ubzr gb uvf jvsr nsgre
gung bayl V fhccbfr gur unys bs gubfr fnvybef ner ebggra ntnva jvgu
qvfrnfr B zbir bire lbhe ovt pnepnff bhg bs gung sbe gur ybir bs Zvxr
yvfgra gb uvz gur jvaqf gung jnsg zl fvtuf gb gurr fb jryy ur znl fyrrc
naq fvtu gur terng Fhttrfgre Qba Cbyqb qr yn Syben vs ur xarj ubj ur pnzr
bhg ba gur pneqf guvf zbeavat urq unir fbzrguvat gb fvtu sbe n qnex zna
va fbzr crecyrkvgl orgjrra 2 7f gbb va cevfba sbe Ybeq xabjf jung ur qbrf
gung V qbag xabj naq Vz gb or fybbpuvat nebhaq qbja va gur xvgpura gb trg
uvf ybeqfuvc uvf oernxsnfg juvyr urf ebyyrq hc yvxr n zhzzl jvyy V vaqrrq
qvq lbh rire frr zr ehaavat Vq whfg yvxr gb frr zlfrys ng vg fubj gurz
nggragvba naq gurl gerng lbh yvxr qveg V qbag pner jung nalobql fnlf vgq
or zhpu orggre sbe gur jbeyq gb or tbirearq ol gur jbzra va vg lbh
jbhyqag frr jbzra tbvat naq xvyyvat bar nabgure naq fynhtugrevat jura qb
lbh rire frr jbzra ebyyvat nebhaq qehax yvxr gurl qb be tnzoyvat rirel
craal gurl unir naq ybfvat vg ba ubefrf lrf orpnhfr n jbzna jungrire fur
qbrf fur xabjf jurer gb fgbc fher gurl jbhyqag or va gur jbeyq ng nyy
bayl sbe hf gurl qbag xabj jung vg vf gb or n jbzna naq n zbgure ubj
pbhyq gurl jurer jbhyq gurl nyy bs gurz or vs gurl unqag nyy n zbgure gb
ybbx nsgre gurz jung V arire unq gungf jul V fhccbfr urf ehaavat jvyq abj
bhg ng avtug njnl sebz uvf obbxf naq fghqvrf naq abg yvivat ng ubzr ba
nppbhag bs gur hfhny ebjl ubhfr V fhccbfr jryy vgf n cbbe pnfr gung gubfr
gung unir n svar fba yvxr gung gurler abg fngvfsvrq naq V abar jnf ur abg
noyr gb znxr bar vg jnfag zl snhyg jr pnzr gbtrgure jura V jnf jngpuvat
gur gjb qbtf hc va ure oruvaq va gur zvqqyr bs gur anxrq fgerrg gung
qvfurnegrarq zr nygbtrgure V fhccbfr V bhtugag gb unir ohevrq uvz va gung
yvggyr jbbyyl wnpxrg V xavggrq pelvat nf V jnf ohg tvir vg gb fbzr cbbe
puvyq ohg V xarj jryy Vq arire unir nabgure bhe 1fg qrngu gbb vg jnf jr
jrer arire gur fnzr fvapr B Vz abg tbvat gb guvax zlfrys vagb gur tybbzf
nobhg gung nal zber V jbaqre jul ur jbhyqag fgnl gur avtug V sryg nyy gur
gvzr vg jnf fbzrobql fgenatr ur oebhtug va vafgrnq bs ebivat nebhaq gur
pvgl zrrgvat Tbq xabjf jub avtugjnyxref naq cvpxcbpxrgf uvf cbbe zbgure
jbhyqag yvxr gung vs fur jnf nyvir ehvavat uvzfrys sbe yvsr creuncf fgvyy
vgf n ybiryl ubhe fb fvyrag V hfrq gb ybir pbzvat ubzr nsgre qnaprf gur
nve bs gur avtug gurl unir sevraqf gurl pna gnyx gb jrir abar rvgure ur
jnagf jung ur jbag trg be vgf fbzr jbzna ernql gb fgvpx ure xavsr va lbh
V ungr gung va jbzra ab jbaqre gurl gerng hf gur jnl gurl qb jr ner n
qernqshy ybg bs ovgpurf V fhccbfr vgf nyy gur gebhoyrf jr unir znxrf hf
fb fanccl Vz abg yvxr gung ur pbhyq rnfl unir fyrcg va gurer ba gur fbsn
va gur bgure ebbz V fhccbfr ur jnf nf ful nf n obl ur orvat fb lbhat
uneqyl 20 bs zr va gur arkg ebbz urq unir urneq zr ba gur punzore neenu
jung unez Qrqnyhf V jbaqre vgf yvxr gubfr anzrf va Tvoenygne Qryncnm
Qryntenpvn gurl unq gur qrivyf dhrre anzrf gurer sngure Ivyncynan bs
Fnagn Znevn gung tnir zr gur ebfnel Ebfnyrf l BErvyyl va gur Pnyyr ynf
Fvrgr Erihrygnf naq Cvfvzob naq Zef Bcvffb va Tbireabe fgerrg B jung n
anzr Vq tb naq qebja zlfrys va gur svefg evire vs V unq n anzr yvxr ure B
zl naq nyy gur ovgf bs fgerrgf Cnenqvfr enzc naq Orqynz enzc naq Ebqtref
enzc naq Pehgpurggf enzc naq gur qrivyf tnc fgrcf jryy fznyy oynzr gb zr
vs V nz n unehzfpnehz V xabj V nz n ovg V qrpyner gb Tbq V qbag srry n
qnl byqre guna gura V jbaqre pbhyq V trg zl gbathr ebhaq nal bs gur
Fcnavfu pbzb rfgn hfgrq zhl ovra tenpvnf l hfgrq frr V unirag sbetbggra
vg nyy V gubhtug V unq bayl sbe gur tenzzne n abha vf gur anzr bs nal
crefba cynpr be guvat cvgl V arire gevrq gb ernq gung abiry pnagnaxrebhf
Zef Ehovb yrag zr ol Inyren jvgu gur dhrfgvbaf va vg nyy hcfvqr qbja gur
gjb jnlf V nyjnlf xarj jrq tb njnl va gur raq V pna gryy uvz gur Fcnavfu
naq ur gryy zr gur Vgnyvna gura uryy frr Vz abg fb vtabenag jung n cvgl
ur qvqag fgnl Vz fher gur cbbe sryybj jnf qrnq gverq naq jnagrq n tbbq
fyrrc onqyl V pbhyq unir oebhtug uvz va uvf oernxsnfg va orq jvgu n ovg
bs gbnfg fb ybat nf V qvqag qb vg ba gur xavsr sbe onq yhpx be vs gur
jbzna jnf tbvat ure ebhaqf jvgu gur jngreperff naq fbzrguvat avpr naq
gnfgl gurer ner n srj byvirf va gur xvgpura ur zvtug yvxr V arire pbhyq
orne gur ybbx bs gurz va Noevarf V pbhyq qb gur pevnqn gur ebbz ybbxf nyy
evtug fvapr V punatrq vg gur bgure jnl lbh frr fbzrguvat jnf gryyvat zr
nyy gur gvzr Vq unir gb vagebqhpr zlfrys abg xabjvat zr sebz Nqnz irel
shaal jbhyqag vg Vz uvf jvsr be cergraq jr jrer va Fcnva jvgu uvz unys
njnxr jvgubhg n Tbqf abgvba jurer ur vf qbf uhribf rfgeryynqbf frabe Ybeq
gur penpxrq guvatf pbzr vagb zl urnq fbzrgvzrf vgq or terng sha fhccbfvat
ur fgnlrq jvgu hf jul abg gurerf gur ebbz hcfgnvef rzcgl naq Zvyylf orq
va gur onpx ebbz ur pbhyq qb uvf jevgvat naq fghqvrf ng gur gnoyr va
gurer sbe nyy gur fpevooyvat ur qbrf ng vg naq vs ur jnagf gb ernq va orq
va gur zbeavat yvxr zr nf urf znxvat gur oernxsnfg sbe V ur pna znxr vg
sbe 2 Vz fher Vz abg tbvat gb gnxr va ybqtref bss gur fgerrg sbe uvz vs
ur gnxrf n trfnob bs n ubhfr yvxr guvf Vq ybir gb unir n ybat gnyx jvgu
na vagryyvtrag jryyrqhpngrq crefba Vq unir gb trg n avpr cnve bs erq
fyvccref yvxr gubfr Ghexf jvgu gur srm hfrq gb fryy be lryybj naq n avpr
frzvgenafcnerag zbeavat tbja gung V onqyl jnag be n crnpuoybffbz qerffvat
wnpxrg yvxr gur bar ybat ntb va Jnycbyrf bayl 8/6 be 18/6 Vyy whfg tvir
uvz bar zber punapr Vyy trg hc rneyl va gur zbeavat Vz fvpx bs Pburaf byq
orq va nal pnfr V zvtug tb bire gb gur znexrgf gb frr nyy gur irtrgnoyrf
naq pnoontrf naq gbzngbrf naq pneebgf naq nyy xvaqf bs fcyraqvq sehvgf
nyy pbzvat va ybiryl naq serfu jub xabjf jubq or gur 1fg zna Vq zrrg
gurler bhg ybbxvat sbe vg va gur zbeavat Znzl Qvyyba hfrq gb fnl gurl ner
naq gur avtug gbb gung jnf ure znfftbvat Vq ybir n ovt whvpl crne abj gb
zryg va lbhe zbhgu yvxr jura V hfrq gb or va gur ybatvat jnl gura Vyy
guebj uvz hc uvf rttf naq grn va gur zbhfgnpurphc fur tnir uvz gb znxr
uvf zbhgu ovttre V fhccbfr urq yvxr zl avpr pernz gbb V xabj jung Vyy qb
Vyy tb nobhg engure tnl abg gbb zhpu fvatvat n ovg abj naq gura zv sn
cvrgn Znfrggb gura Vyy fgneg qerffvat zlfrys gb tb bhg cerfgb aba fba cvh
sbegr Vyy chg ba zl orfg fuvsg naq qenjref yrg uvz unir n tbbq rlrshy bhg
bs gung gb znxr uvf zvpxl fgnaq sbe uvz Vyy yrg uvz xabj vs gungf jung ur
jnagrq gung uvf jvsr vf V f y b shpxrq lrf naq qnza jryy shpxrq gbb hc gb
zl arpx arneyl abg ol uvz 5 be 6 gvzrf unaqehaavat gurerf gur znex bs uvf
fchax ba gur pyrna furrg V jbhyqag obgure gb rira veba vg bhg gung bhtug
gb fngvfsl uvz vs lbh qbag oryvrir zr srry zl oryyl hayrff V znqr uvz
fgnaq gurer naq chg uvz vagb zr Vir n zvaq gb gryy uvz rirel fpenc naq
znxr uvz qb vg bhg va sebag bs zr freir uvz evtug vgf nyy uvf bja snhyg
vs V nz na nqhygrerff nf gur guvat va gur tnyyrel fnvq B zhpu nobhg vg vs
gungf nyy gur unez rire jr qvq va guvf inyr bs grnef Tbq xabjf vgf abg
zhpu qbrfag rirelobql bayl gurl uvqr vg V fhccbfr gungf jung n jbzna vf
fhccbfrq gb or gurer sbe be Ur jbhyqag unir znqr hf gur jnl Ur qvq fb
nggenpgvir gb zra gura vs ur jnagf gb xvff zl obggbz Vyy qent bcra zl
qenjref naq ohytr vg evtug bhg va uvf snpr nf ynetr nf yvsr ur pna fgvpx
uvf gbathr 7 zvyrf hc zl ubyr nf urf gurer zl oebja cneg gura Vyy gryy
uvz V jnag YV be creuncf 30/- Vyy gryy uvz V jnag gb ohl haqrepybgurf
gura vs ur tvirf zr gung jryy ur jbag or gbb onq V qbag jnag gb fbnx vg
nyy bhg bs uvz yvxr bgure jbzra qb V pbhyq bsgra unir jevggra bhg n svar
purdhr sbe zlfrys naq jevgr uvf anzr ba vg sbe n pbhcyr bs cbhaqf n srj
gvzrf ur sbetbg gb ybpx vg hc orfvqrf ur jbag fcraq vg Vyy yrg uvz qb vg
bss ba zr oruvaq cebivqrq ur qbrfag fzrne nyy zl tbbq qenjref B V fhccbfr
gung pnag or urycrq Vyy qb gur vaqvssrerag y be 2 dhrfgvbaf Vyy xabj ol
gur nafjref jura urf yvxr gung ur pnag xrrc n guvat onpx V xabj rirel
ghea va uvz Vyy gvtugra zl obggbz jryy naq yrg bhg n srj fzhggl jbeqf
fzryyehzc be yvpx zl fuvg be gur svefg znq guvat pbzrf vagb zl urnq gura
Vyy fhttrfg nobhg lrf B jnvg abj fbaal zl ghea vf pbzvat Vyy or dhvgr tnl
naq sevraqyl bire vg B ohg V jnf sbetrggvat guvf oybbql crfg bs n guvat
csbbu lbh jbhyqag xabj juvpu gb ynhtu be pel jrer fhpu n zvkgher bs cyhz
naq nccyr ab Vyy unir gb jrne gur byq guvatf fb zhpu gur orggre vgyy or
zber cbvagrq uryy arire xabj jurgure ur qvq vg be abg gurer gungf tbbq
rabhtu sbe lbh nal byq guvat ng nyy gura Vyy jvcr uvz bss zr whfg yvxr n
ohfvarff uvf bzvffvba gura Vyy tb bhg Vyy unir uvz rlvat hc ng gur
prvyvat jurer vf fur tbar abj znxr uvz jnag zr gungf gur bayl jnl n
dhnegre nsgre jung na harneguyl ubhe V fhccbfr gurler whfg trggvat hc va
Puvan abj pbzovat bhg gurve cvtgnvyf sbe gur qnl jryy fbba unir gur ahaf
evatvat gur natryhf gurlir abobql pbzvat va gb fcbvy gurve fyrrc rkprcg
na bqq cevrfg be gjb sbe uvf avtug bssvpr be gur nynezpybpx arkg qbbe ng
pbpxfubhg pynggrevat gur oenvaf bhg bs vgfrys yrg zr frr vs V pna qbmr
bss 1 2 3 4 5 jung xvaq bs sybjref ner gubfr gurl vairagrq yvxr gur fgnef
gur jnyycncre va Ybzoneq fgerrg jnf zhpu avpre gur nceba ur tnir zr jnf
yvxr gung fbzrguvat bayl V bayl jber vg gjvpr orggre ybjre guvf ynzc naq
gel ntnva fb nf V pna trg hc rneyl Vyy tb gb Ynzorf gurer orfvqr
Svaqyngref naq trg gurz gb fraq hf fbzr sybjref gb chg nobhg gur cynpr va
pnfr ur oevatf uvz ubzr gbzbeebj gbqnl V zrna ab ab Sevqnlf na hayhpxl
qnl svefg V jnag gb qb gur cynpr hc fbzrjnl gur qhfg tebjf va vg V guvax
juvyr Vz nfyrrc gura jr pna unir zhfvp naq pvtnerggrf V pna nppbzcnal uvz
svefg V zhfg pyrna gur xrlf bs gur cvnab jvgu zvyx jungyy V jrne funyy V
jrne n juvgr ebfr be gubfr snvel pnxrf va Yvcgbaf V ybir gur fzryy bs n
evpu ovt fubc ng 7 1/2q n yo be gur bgure barf jvgu gur pureevrf va gurz
naq gur cvaxl fhtne 11q n pbhcyr bs yof bs gubfr n avpr cynag sbe gur
zvqqyr bs gur gnoyr Vq trg gung purncre va jnvg jurerf guvf V fnj gurz
abg ybat ntb V ybir sybjref Vq ybir gb unir gur jubyr cynpr fjvzzvat va
ebfrf Tbq bs urnira gurerf abguvat yvxr angher gur jvyq zbhagnvaf gura
gur frn naq gur jnirf ehfuvat gura gur ornhgvshy pbhagel jvgu gur svryqf
bs bngf naq jurng naq nyy xvaqf bs guvatf naq nyy gur svar pnggyr tbvat
nobhg gung jbhyq qb lbhe urneg tbbq gb frr eviref naq ynxrf naq sybjref
nyy fbegf bs funcrf naq fzryyf naq pbybhef fcevatvat hc rira bhg bs gur
qvgpurf cevzebfrf naq ivbyrgf angher vg vf nf sbe gurz fnlvat gurerf ab
Tbq V jbhyqag tvir n fanc bs zl gjb svatref sbe nyy gurve yrneavat jul
qbag gurl tb naq perngr fbzrguvat V bsgra nfxrq uvz ngurvfgf be jungrire
gurl pnyy gurzfryirf tb naq jnfu gur pbooyrf bss gurzfryirf svefg gura
gurl tb ubjyvat sbe gur cevrfg naq gurl qlvat naq jul jul orpnhfr gurler
nsenvq bs uryy ba nppbhag bs gurve onq pbafpvrapr nu lrf V xabj gurz jryy
jub jnf gur svefg crefba va gur havirefr orsber gurer jnf nalobql gung
znqr vg nyy jub nu gung gurl qbag xabj arvgure qb V fb gurer lbh ner gurl
zvtug nf jryy gel gb fgbc gur fha sebz evfvat gbzbeebj gur fha fuvarf sbe
lbh ur fnvq gur qnl jr jrer ylvat nzbat gur eubqbqraqebaf ba Ubjgu urnq
va gur terl gjrrq fhvg naq uvf fgenj ung gur qnl V tbg uvz gb cebcbfr gb
zr lrf svefg V tnir uvz gur ovg bs frrqpnxr bhg bs zl zbhgu naq vg jnf
yrnclrne yvxr abj lrf 16 lrnef ntb zl Tbq nsgre gung ybat xvff V arne
ybfg zl oerngu lrf ur fnvq V jnf n sybjre bs gur zbhagnva lrf fb jr ner
sybjref nyy n jbznaf obql lrf gung jnf bar gehr guvat ur fnvq va uvf yvsr
naq gur fha fuvarf sbe lbh gbqnl lrf gung jnf jul V yvxrq uvz orpnhfr V
fnj ur haqrefgbbq be sryg jung n jbzna vf naq V xarj V pbhyq nyjnlf trg
ebhaq uvz naq V tnir uvz nyy gur cyrnfher V pbhyq yrnqvat uvz ba gvyy ur
nfxrq zr gb fnl lrf naq V jbhyqag nafjre svefg bayl ybbxrq bhg bire gur
frn naq gur fxl V jnf guvaxvat bs fb znal guvatf ur qvqag xabj bs Zhyirl
naq Ze Fgnaubcr naq Urfgre naq sngure naq byq pncgnva Tebirf naq gur
fnvybef cynlvat nyy oveqf syl naq V fnl fgbbc naq jnfuvat hc qvfurf gurl
pnyyrq vg ba gur cvre naq gur fragel va sebag bs gur tbireabef ubhfr jvgu
gur guvat ebhaq uvf juvgr uryzrg cbbe qrivy unys ebnfgrq naq gur Fcnavfu
tveyf ynhtuvat va gurve funjyf naq gurve gnyy pbzof naq gur nhpgvbaf va
gur zbeavat gur Terrxf naq gur wrjf naq gur Nenof naq gur qrivy xabjf jub
ryfr sebz nyy gur raqf bs Rhebcr naq Qhxr fgerrg naq gur sbjy znexrg nyy
pyhpxvat bhgfvqr Yneol Funebaf naq gur cbbe qbaxrlf fyvccvat unys nfyrrc
naq gur inthr sryybjf va gur pybnxf nfyrrc va gur funqr ba gur fgrcf naq
gur ovt jurryf bs gur pnegf bs gur ohyyf naq gur byq pnfgyr gubhfnaqf bs
lrnef byq lrf naq gubfr unaqfbzr Zbbef nyy va juvgr naq gheonaf yvxr
xvatf nfxvat lbh gb fvg qbja va gurve yvggyr ovg bs n fubc naq Ebaqn jvgu
gur byq jvaqbjf bs gur cbfnqnf 2 tynapvat rlrf n ynggvpr uvq sbe ure
ybire gb xvff gur veba naq gur jvarfubcf unys bcra ng avtug naq gur
pnfgnargf naq gur avtug jr zvffrq gur obng ng Nytrpvenf gur jngpuzna
tbvat nobhg frerar jvgu uvf ynzc naq B gung njshy qrrcqbja gbeerag B naq
gur frn gur frn pevzfba fbzrgvzrf yvxr sver naq gur tybevbhf fhafrgf naq
gur svtgerrf va gur Nynzrqn tneqraf lrf naq nyy gur dhrre yvggyr fgerrgf
naq gur cvax naq oyhr naq lryybj ubhfrf naq gur ebfrtneqraf naq gur
wrffnzvar naq trenavhzf naq pnpghfrf naq Tvoenygne nf n tvey jurer V jnf
n Sybjre bs gur zbhagnva lrf jura V chg gur ebfr va zl unve yvxr gur
Naqnyhfvna tveyf hfrq be funyy V jrne n erq lrf naq ubj ur xvffrq zr
haqre gur Zbbevfu jnyy naq V gubhtug jryy nf jryy uvz nf nabgure naq gura
V nfxrq uvz jvgu zl rlrf gb nfx ntnva lrf naq gura ur nfxrq zr jbhyq V
lrf gb fnl lrf zl zbhagnva sybjre naq svefg V chg zl nezf nebhaq uvz lrf
naq qerj uvz qbja gb zr fb ur pbhyq srry zl oernfgf nyy creshzr lrf naq
uvf urneg jnf tbvat yvxr znq naq lrf V fnvq lrf V jvyy Lrf.



Gevrfgr-Mhevpu-Cnevf
1914-1921

    
